ABC Dictionary 
of Ancient Japanese Phonograms 


ABC CHINESE DICTIONARY SERIES 

Victor H. Mair, General Editor 

 

The ABC Chinese Dictionary Series aims to provide a complete set of convenient and reliable 
reference tools for all those who need to deal with Chinese words and characters. A unique feature 
of the series is the adoption of a strict alphabetical order, the fastest and most user-friendly way to 
look up words in a Chinese dictionary. Most volumes contain graphically oriented indices to assist 
in finding characters whose pronunciation is not known. The ABC dictionaries and compilations 
rely on the best expertise available in China and North America and are based on the application 
of radically new strategies for the study of Sinitic languages and the Chinese writing system, 
including the first clear distinction between the etymology of the words, on the one hand, and the 
evolution of shapes, sounds, and meanings of characters, on the other. While aiming for 
conciseness and accuracy, series volumes also strive to apply the highest standards of 
lexicography in all respects, including compatibility with computer technology for information 
processing. 

 

 

Other titles in the series 

 

ABC Chinese-English Dictionary (desk reference and pocket editions) 

Edited by John DeFrancis 

 

ABC Dictionary of Chinese Proverbs 

Edited by John S. Rohsenow 

 

ABC Chinese-English Comprehensive Dictionary 

Edited by John DeFrancis 

 

A Handbook of 'Phags-pa Chinese 

W. South Coblin 

 

ABC Etymological Dictionary of Old Chinese 

Axel Schuessler 

 


uhplogo
ABC Dictionary 
of Ancient Japanese 
Phonograms 

John R. Bentley 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

University of Hawai‘i Press 

Honolulu 


© 2016 University of Hawai‘i Press 

All rights reserved 

Printed in the United States of America 

21 20 19 18 17 16 6 5 4 3 2 1 

 

 

 

 

 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication data 

Bentley, John R., author. 

 ABC dictionary of ancient Japanese phonograms / John R. Bentley. 

 pages cm―(ABC Chinese dictionary series) 

 Includes bibliographical references and index. 

 ISBN 978-0-8248-5610-6 hardcover : alk. paper 

 1. Japanese language―Phonology, Historical―Dictionaries. 2. Chinese 
characters―Japan―Dictionaries. 3. Japanese 
language―Writing―Dictionaries. I. Title. II. Series: ABC Chinese 
dictionary series. 

 PL540.B46 2016 

 495.61'5―dc23 

2015021660 

 

 

 

 

University of Hawai‘i Press books are printed on acid-free paper and 

meet the guidelines for permanence and durability of the 

Council on Library Resources. 

 

 

Camera-ready copy prepared by the author. 

 

 

Printed by IBT Global 


CONTENTS 

 

 

 

Acknowledgments................................................................................................ vii 

Conventions ........................................................................................................... 1 

 1.0 Chinese Data.............................................................................................. 1 

 1.1 Old Chinese ............................................................................................... 1 

 1.2 Later Han Chinese ..................................................................................... 2 

 1.3 Early Middle Chinese ................................................................................ 2 

 1.4 Late Middle Chinese ................................................................................. 2 

 2.0 Sino-Xenic ................................................................................................. 2 

 2.1 Sino-Vietnamese and Chữ Nôm ................................................................ 3 

 2.2 Sino-Korean............................................................................................... 4 

 2.3 Sino-Japanese ............................................................................................ 4 

 2.4 Strata of ongana ........................................................................................ 5 

 2.4.1 Wei zhi Stratum ...................................................................................... 5 

 2.4.2 Paekche-based Stratum ........................................................................... 5 

 2.4.3 Early and Late Japanese Strata ............................................................... 5 

 2.4.4 Chang’an-based Strata ............................................................................ 5 

 2.5 Go-on Readings ......................................................................................... 6 

 3.0 Ongana versus Kungana ........................................................................... 7 

 4.0 Romanization............................................................................................. 7 

Abbreviations ......................................................................................................... 9 

List of texts cited .................................................................................................. 10 

Dictionary A – Z .................................................................................................. 13 

Chart of all Phonograms .................................................................................... 559 

Bibliography ...................................................................................................... 593 

Pinyin Index ....................................................................................................... 596 

 

 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

 

 

The idea for a dictionary of man’yōgana came to me in the summer of 1995, coinciding 
with the time when my son, Stephen, was hospitalized with peritonitis. The original idea 
was to compile a dictionary of phonograms with citations. Originally I had envisioned a 
dictionary with the entry character, and information regarding Early Middle Chinese, Goon, 
and Sino-Korean. Professor Alexander ‘Sasha’ Vovin took an interest in this project 
and encouraged me to come to University of Hawai‘i and finish my graduate work. He 
also encouraged me to include data from Old Chinese with Early Middle Chinese. At the 
University of Hawai‘i I also had the great opportunity to discuss the dictionary project 
with a linguistic student, Marc Miyake. During numerous discussions over the course of 
several years Marc encouraged me to expand my database to include Sino-Vietnamese 
and Chữ Nôm. Because of the advice and patient instruction of these two men, I have 
been able to expand the information in the dictionary, and I believe its usefulness has 
been greatly enhanced. 

It is important for me to single out a number of people to express my appreciation for 
their help. I am grateful to Marc Miyake and his willingness to spend many hours talking 
about Japanese language history, philology, Sino-Xenic in East Asia, and culture in 
general. Sasha Vovin has also been a great supporter of my work. He took me under his 
wing as a non-traditional graduate student and shepherded me through a Masters and 
Doctorate program. I am also grateful to my PhD committee, Professors Vovin, Gerald B. 
Mathias, Leon Serafim, David Ashworth, Robert Huey, and Paul Varley, for steering me 
away from making the draft of the dictionary my doctoral dissertation, rightly worried 
that it would brand me ‘a lexicographer.’ 

I am also grateful to Victor Mair for his willingness to share his expertise and 
knowledge with me. Also, I wish to thank the readers for University of Hawai‘i Press for 
their helpful and patient comments. Any errors that remain are my responsibility. 
Stephanie Chun and Wanda China, and the staff at University of Hawai‘i Press provided 
helpful guidance above and beyond the call of duty, both editorially and technologically. 
A very special, heartfelt thanks goes to Patricia Crosby, formerly the editor at University 
of Hawai‘i Press, who was patient with me for over a decade. I am indebted to my 
family: my children Jennifer, Michelle, and Stephen, as well as my beloved wife, Chiemi, 
for their support and encouragement. As a graduate student a professor once told me that 
because I had a family with small children they would necessarily consume much of my 
time, and so my future scholarly output would suffer. I am happy to have proven him 
wrong. My family has actually been the catalyst for much of my output. 

 

An important portion of this research was funded by a National Endowment of the 
Humanities Summer Stipend, for which the author expresses his sincerest thanks to the 
Endowment. 

 

 

 

 


CONVENTIONS 

 

 

This dictionary arranges extant examples of Japanese man’yōgana phonograms in 
alphabetic order. Ongana are listed first followed by examples of kungana. Each entry 
contains the following information: the Chinese character, the representative Old 
Japanese value in Romanization, and then representative Chinese or Sino-Xenic 
information: Old Chinese, Later Han Chinese, Early Middle Chinese, Go-on, Kan-on, 
Chữ Nôm, Sino-Vietnamese, and Sino-Korean. Each entry is alphabetized according to 
the Old Japanese sound value. There are multiple entries of a variety of kanji because 
many have more than one possible reading. A character finding index at the end of the 
dictionary will alert the reader to a kanji with multiple readings. After the Chinese and 
Sino-Xenic information, a select number of attested examples are listed, with the oldest 
datable examples listed first. In order to demonstrate that Japan was at least partly 
indebted to the kingdoms on the Korean Peninsula for their literacy, I have included 
examples from the kingdoms of Koguryŏ, Paekche, and Silla. As a plethora of bamboo or 
wooden slips or tablets (mokkan) have been excavated in the last several decades, I have 
included information from these, also. Each mokkan example is cited by its number as 
cataloged by Mokkan Gakkai, or when a number has yet to be assigned, from the relevant 
page in Mokkan kenkyū. Some of the earliest mokkan have yet to be numbered, and are 
listed as ‘unnumbered tablet.’ 

One way it is hoped that this dictionary will make a significant contribution is by 
providing a substantial amount of state-of-the-art information regarding reconstructed 
languages of East Asia as well as putting important Sino-Xenic information in one easy 
to find place. Explanations about each of these languages or reconstructions appear below. 

 

1.0 Chinese data 

1.1 Old Chinese 

Reconstructing Old Chinese (OC), dated to the years between 1200 to 200 BCE, is a 
daunting task. Karlgren’s reconstruction of Old Chinese is known as ‘Archaic Chinese,’ 
but its critical weakness is that he has based his reconstruction of Archaic Chinese on his 
earlier reconstruction of Ancient Chinese, or what we now call Middle Chinese. Thus, it 
is essentially a reconstruction based upon a reconstruction. There is much that is not 
understood about Old Chinese, a language preserved in the Shang oracle bone 
inscriptions (ca. 1250–1050 BCE), bronze inscriptions from the Western Zhou (1050–770 
BCE), and a variety of fragments of the oldest written works in China. Schuessler has 
compiled a dictionary of Old Chinese etymology (2007) with a set of reconstructed forms 
(2009). Admitting that there is still much work to do, Schuessler calls his reconstruction 
of OC ‘Minimal Old Chinese’. I have opted to include OC in this dictionary, as there are 
extremely old relics of OC that persist in man’yōgana. The best-known example is 支 
(Sino-Japanese si, Sino-Korean ci) representing ki. Baxter and Sagart have come out with 
a new reconstruction of Old Chinese (2014), and I have only had reference it when it was 
able to shed light that Schuessler’s reconstruction did not. The majority of cases deal with 
their OC reconstruction demonstrating the existence of a Chinese sound value with final 
–r that also exists in our data. When I have had reference to Baxter and Sagart, their 
reconstruction is followed by a section sign (§). 

 


1.2 Later Han Chinese 

Later Han Chinese (LH), as Schuessler (2009:29) explains, “…represents an older strain 
of the language of the Eastern Han period from perhaps the 1st century AD.” In actuality, 
based on earlier work, Schuessler’s Later Han as currently presented represents the 
language of the second or third centuries. It is provided in the dictionary to help elucidate 
data from Wei zhi, as well as fossilized readings imported into Japan (from Paekche?) 
that pre-date Early Middle Chinese. 

 

1.3 Early Middle Chinese 

Early Middle Chinese (EMC) is generally thought to represent the language codified in 
the dictionary Qieyun (601 CE). Pulleyblank (1984:129–130) has argued that there was 
more than just an evolutionary change in relation to the language; there was also a 
geographical change, which meant a change in the dialect. In addition to the data in 
Qieyun, Pulleyblank has also had reference to Min dialect data, Sino-Vietnamese, and 
Japanese data (Sino-Japanese and man’yōgana). I have relied on Schuessler’s Middle 
Chinese reconstruction for these data, which is a modification of Li Fan-kuei’s work 
(Schuessler 2009:6), rather than Pulleyblank, which is now almost 30 years old. 
Regarding the use of Qieyun Schuessler (2009:6) notes, “The nature and linguistic value 
of the Qieyun and the language it represents has long been a matter of debate which 
colors one’s attitude towards MC as well as OC.” Schuessler’s latest work is an attempt 
to strike a balance with what we know from actual data and what is based on theory, and 
is thus only one piece of information in this dictionary. 

 

1.4 Late Middle Chinese 

Late Middle Chinese (LMC), according to Pulleyblank (1970:204), reflects the language 
of mid to late Tang Chinese (618–960 CE), or the language of the capital of Chang’an. 
This language was brought back to Japan by students sent by the Japanese court to study 
in Chang’an. Pulleyblank’s original thrust in reconstructing LMC was to view the 
preserved rhymes as originating from northwestern Chinese, instead of southern Chinese, 
from which Early Middle Chinese had originated (Pulleyblank 1984:61–62). I have 
altered some LMC reconstructions according to Miyake (2003a). 

 

2.0 Sino-Xenic 

Coined by Samuel E. Martin (1924–2009), Sino-Xenic is an umbrella term for Chinese 
readings borrowed into the various languages within the cultural realm of China, 
specifically Sino-Japanese, Sino-Korean, and Sino-Vietnamese. Miyake (2003a:99) 
explains why these Sino-Xenic (his SX) data are critical to our work, 

 

This class of borrowings is characterized by two traits: (1) Scale: SX consists 
not of sporadic borrowings of a few words, but the importation of the entire 
Chinese lexicon. (2) Accuracy and consistency: SX borrowings are not 
random attempts to imitate Chinese pronunciations. They represent conscious 
attempts to imitate Chinese pronunciation as much as possible. As a result of 
this, they may not be exact copies of Chinese, but they have regular 
correspondences with Chinese. 

 

 


i, e, ê, 
ay, ai 

P 


ư, ơ, a, 
â, ă 

N 


u, o, ô, 
au, âu 

L 


2.1 Sino-Vietnamese and Chữ Nôm 

The existence of Sino-Vietnamese, and its hybrid, Chữ Nôm (represented variously as 𡨸 
喃 or 字喃, hereafter Nôm), is important for the study of earlier phonological stages of 
Chinese, as well as contributing to a better understanding about Sino-Xenic. Nôm was 
developed by the literati in Vietnam after it gained independence from China in 939 CE. 
It later became the national script. Much of the literary culture of Vietnam was written in 
Nôm, until the arrival of the French, when the Roman alphabet (called ‘quốc ngữ’ 
national script) was introduced. For our purposes, it is important to point out that Early 
Vietnamese made more phonological distinctions than Chinese. Thus, some Nôm 
characters have a wider range of readings than the original Chinese graph that provided 
the basis.1 

1 The discussion that follows was greatly enhanced by a discussion I had with Marc 
Miyake in late May 2010. I am grateful for his generosity with his time and vast knowledge. 

Nôm is important for an understanding of earlier states of Chinese because it had 
more vocalic values than either Japanese or Korean. Downer (1987:140) has outlined the 
vowels of Nôm in a helpful classification, reproduced below, with a few simplifications, 
as well as converting his IPA back to quốc ngữ. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I have labeled each group as P: palatal, N: neutral, and L: labial. This three-way 
distinction is important for framing a discussion about Japanese phonology, because 
linguists of Old Japanese agree that the overall vocalic distinction found in man’yōgana 
is a palatal versus labial versus neutral distinction (cf. Martin 1987:57–58). 

Tangentially related to Nôm is Sino-Vietnamese (SV). As China exerted political and 
cultural influence over the country for nearly a millennium, it being a province of China 
from 111 BCE till its successful independence movement in 939 CE, Chinese-speaking 
immigrants resided in northern Vietnam, and Chinese culture and language went with them. 
However, most of what we call Sino-Vietnamese today is based on LMC, which is of only 
marginal value for research into man’yōgana. There are traces of Old Sino-Vietnamese, but 
these are generally relics that have become internalized as native words. Consider that in 
SV the morpheme for ‘wife’ is phụ, based on Middle Chinese 婦 bjǝu (or Pulleyblank’s 
EMC buw). Compare that with a doublet for ‘wife’, which is Old Sino-Vietnamese vợ, 


based on Old Chinese *bǝʔ. Because of the scattered nature of information from the 
language of Vietnam, this dictionary contains data from both Nôm and SV. 

For my data I have relied on two dictionaries for Nôm readings: the large twovolume 
edition of Trương (2007), and Nguyễn (1971). In general I have relied on 
Nguyễn for the reading of characters, and have had reference to Trương only if an 
obscure graph does not appear in Nguyễn. In cases where many Nôm readings for one 
character exist, I have only given a representative selection of these data, usually deleting 
one example where the only difference is in tone. 

 

2.2 Sino-Korean 

Sino-Korean (SK), like Sino-Vietnamese, is based on LMC. Analogous to the 
geographical location of Vietnam, being adjacent to China meant that the language of 
Korea contains an enormous variety of Chinese loan words, some from OC, some from 
EMC, but the majority from LMC. The dating of SK is problematic, but I follow Miyake 
(2003a:112) who dates SK to around the eighth century. For my data I have relied on a 
handwritten manuscript of the late 18th Century dictionary, Cenun okphyen ‘The Jeweled 
Manuscript of Complete Rhymes,’ a copy of which is in the possession of the author. 

 

2.3 Sino-Japanese 

Sino-Japanese has been traditionally organized into five groups (Numoto 1997:9–20): 
Go-on (pre-589 CE), Kan-on (Chang’an Chinese, ca. 650+), Shin-Kan-on (New Kan-on, 
ca. 900), Sou’on (Song Chinese, ca. 1100), and Tou’on (Tang Chinese, ca. 1600). It is 
critical that we make clear that the term ‘Go-on’ is problematic here, because as the other 
four labels refer to a specific stage of Chinese readings imported into the country at rather 
precise periods, ‘Go-on’ is actually not a specific brand of Sino-Japanese, but rather a 
nebulous amalgamation of different strata, and likely different filtered layers of Sino- 
Japanese. Miyake (2003a:104–105) has argued, based on a comparison of Sino-Japanese 
and Chinese, that Go-on is not the earliest layer of Chinese borrowings, but is actually the 
earliest surviving borrowings, likely brought to Japan by Paekche tutors. Based on the 
work of Miller (1967) and Tōdō (1980), Miyake (2003a:104) makes a crucial observation, 
“Many Go-on readings were lost after the importation of Kan-on….Yet we find Go-on 
readings for every character in Chinese character dictionaries (kanwa jiten). Lexicographers 
have invented what I call ‘pseudo-Go-on’ on the basis of fanqie….” As this 
dictionary contains Go-on as data, I explain below where my Go-on data originated. 

Here it is important to make a distinction between Sino-Japanese and ongana. 
Ongana are kanji used to represent a syllable, or in some cases two-syllables, based on 
one of several strata of Sino-Japanese readings of the character. As an example, the kanji 
加 (OC *krâi, LH ka, EMC ka) was used to represent OJ ka because the Chinese phonetic 
value was appropriately close enough to the Japanese. The kanji 支 has the Go-on and 
Kan-on reading of si, but is used as an ongana for ki, showing that it preserves a Sino- 
Japanese reading from the Old Chinese stratum (or it may be a loan from Sino-Paekche 
which preserved the OC reading). 

Because it is clear from a variety of data that there are several layers of borrowings of 
Chinese into the Japanese islands, I have followed Miyake (2003a:5–42) in trying to 
classify the importation of various kanji according to their earliest attestation. Thus, I 
have set up five different chronological groups within which to categorize the usage of all 
attested ongana in Japan. 


2.4 Strata of ongana 

2.4.1 Wei zhi stratum 

I have labeled the oldest group the Wei zhi stratum (WS). This group represents the 
earliest known set of graphs used in transcriptions of toponyms, titles, or names for 
people in Wa or the various kingdoms on the Korean peninsula. A number of 
assumptions are at work here that need to be spelled out. It is unclear what the linguistic 
map looked like during the Wei era (roughly from 185 to 280 CE) relative to the southern 
half of the peninsula and the Japanese archipelago. Surviving Chinese records give the 
reader the impression that the Wa lived in a region from the southern edge of the 
peninsula into the archipelago. I have erred on the side of caution, and have been rather 
broad in looking for attestations of transcriptions in this region. It seems certain that 
Chinese immigrants connected with the Han commanderies had a pervasive influence on 
the culture of the native Kara and Wa peoples. It also seems somewhat certain that Wa 
speakers lived in polities on the southern edge of the peninsula as well as the archipelago. 
Therefore, my working assumption is that the speakers of the language of Wa included 
territory in the southern part of the Korean peninsula as well as into the Japanese 
archipelago. This ‘bridge’ between the continent and the islands facilitated the flow of 
culture and language into the Japanese archipelago. 

 

2.4.2 Paekche-based stratum 

The next and perhaps most important stratum is called the Paekche based-stratum (PBS). 
Using peninsular attestations from surviving stelae or quotes in Nihon shoki, I note kanji 
that were used by the three kingdoms of Paekche, Koguryŏ, and Silla, and postulate that 
the early Japanese were taught and coached in the use of classical Chinese by Paekche 
teachers (cf. Bentley 2001). If true, this has important ramifications for the study of the 
historical reception of Chinese through the peninsula into Japan, as well as the study of 
Sino-Paekche, which only survives in a number of fragments on the peninsula and in 
Japanese texts (cf. Eom 1991). It is difficult to date this stratum, but as the importation of 
Buddhism and its Sinified scripture into Japan is dated around 538–552 CE, I have 
concluded that it is reasonable to date the PBS around the middle of the sixth century (cf. 
Bentley 2001). Ogura (1995:14) makes much the same claim, saying that he believes that 
Go-on was imported into Japan with the introduction of Buddhism; needless to say, this 
view is overly simplistic as it cannot account for the large variety of readings in Go-on. 

 

2.4.3 Early and Late Japanese strata 

The third stratum is one of the largest, called the Early Japanese stratum (EJS), and 
includes the earliest attestations of kanji-usage in Japan that may represent newer 
borrowings from the peninsula. Many of these kanji are found in Kojiki, and found on 
many excavated mokkan. The next stratum is called the Late Japanese stratum (LJS), 
which includes much of the poetry in Man’yōshū. 

 

2.4.4 Chang’an-based stratum 

The newest group is the Chang’an-based stratum (CBS), found primarily in Nihon shoki, 
with some examples also in Man’yōshū. A word needs to be said about the CBS strata, 
which parallels what Pulleyblank calls Late Middle Chinese (1970–1971). By simply 
examining the differences between Go-on and Kan-on a rather rough and ready chart can 


be constructed to show major phonological changes between EMC and LMC. The 
following chart is based primarily on Numoto (2006:74–75). 

 

Early Middle Chinese > 

Late Middle Chinese 

Voiced initial b, d, g > 

Voiceless initial p, t, k 

Nasal initials m, n > 

Denasalization mb, nd 

Labials p, ph, m, b > 

Fricativization f, fh, mv, fɦ 

Vocalic shift o, e, u > 

New vowels i, a, iu 

Medial glide –y– (生 siyau) > 

Loss of glide (生 sei) 



 

One of the striking differences between EMC and LMC is the development of 
prenasalized stops in Kan-on relative to Go-on. Pulleyblank’s Lexicon does not overtly 
demonstrate this, as a simple example shows: 馬 ‘horse’ EMC maɨ > LMC ma: 
(1991:206). Yet Go-on for horse is me, while Kan-on is ba. A check of Tibetan 
transcriptions, representing Northwest Chinese from which Kan-on is believed to have 
originated, illustrates that ‘horse’ is ’ba, phonetically [mba] (cf. Coblin 1994:135). Based 
on this clear evidence, I have modified Pulleyblank’s LMC to account for this change. 

 

2.5 Go-on readings 

Miyake and other scholars have argued that many of the Go-on readings listed in a 
variety of Chinese character dictionaries are actually inventions of the lexicographers, 
based on fanqie, which are themselves artificial devices to aid in pronunciation. Take as 
an example the kanji 良 ‘good’. Many dictionaries list the Go-on reading as ryou (リョ 
ウ), which is a modernized form. Some dictionaries include kyū-kanazukai ‘older kana 
spellings’, where this kanji would have been spelled as riyau (リヤウ). However, how 
does one know if these represent actual Sino-Japanese pronunciations? Miyake’s solution 
was to rely on Tōdō (1978), which tried to use actual data, or inferences from 
homophones and data from Chinese sources, such as Guangyun or Yunjing, ancient 
rhyming dictionaries in China (2003a:105). 

My approach is somewhat similar, but I have elected to rely on the extensive research 
of Ogura (1995), who has combed through the 42 surviving manuscripts of Hokekyō ongi. 
As this manuscript was created to aid in the proper recitation and understanding of the 
Lotus Sutra, many of the readings in the manuscript reflect Go-on of the eighth century. I 
say ‘many’ because over the years, scribes have contaminated the text by altering some 
readings based on their imperfect knowledge of how certain words should sound, in most 
cases erasing Go-on and putting in Kan-on readings. As a simple example, the kanji 馬 
‘horse’ is glossed me 25 times, but ba twice (other manuscripts lack a gloss). Clearly ba 
is based on Kan-on, where the change m- > mb- has taken place. Thus, the majority of 
these interpolations are easy to spot and ignore. A more difficult problem is a change that 
has taken place in the vernacular and colored the original Go-on reading. Consider the 
kanji 雄 ‘male.’ We find, in order of actual attested glosses wou 26 times, u or un twice, 
and ou once. Looking at the Chinese phonology, we know this kanji should have been 
glide initial, thus wou is the archetype, but as wo and o merged in most environments in 
Middle Japanese, a scribe who relied on his vernacular, may have been tempted to write 
this as ou. The two examples with u reflect contamination from Kan-on. Thus, Ogura’s 
work is important, as he lists the readings from all extant manuscripts. 


I have included Go-on to provide data that a reader can use to triangulate with other 
Sino-Xenic data. For example, 支 is Go-on si, and other than Nôm, none of the Sino- 
Xenic data preserve a velar in initial position, but both 岐伎, related graphs, are Go-on gi, 
suggesting that the velar initial for 支 has been lost in the latest surviving stratum of Goon. 
Another example is where the graph 匝 has the earlier Go-on reading of さふ, while 
the modern reading is そう. The earlier reading is known as kyū-kanazukai or ‘older kana 
usages.’ These earlier readings are important, because when compared with SV tap SK 
cap, it becomes clear that what is ふ in hiragana must have been a –p– plus a vowel in 
the Nara era. 

 

3.0 Ongana versus kungana 

Ongana are kanji used to represent OJ syllables based on their Chinese phonetic 
representation. This may have been based on Sino-Japanese, Sino-Paekche, or some other 
source. Kungana are kanji used to represent OJ syllables based on a translation of the 
semantics of the character. As Miyake (2003a:25) notes, “…kungana involves a two-step 
process. First, one must read a kungana as if it were a semantogram (or logogram, 
JRB)….Second, one must reinterpret this reading in terms of an OJ (near-)homophone 
appropriate for the context in which the sinograph is found.” A popular example from 
Man’yōshū is 鴨 kamo ‘wild duck,’ which was often used at the end of a poetic stanza to 
represent the OJ emphatic particle kamo ‘how it is!’ 

 

4.0 Romanization 

A number of Romanization systems have been proposed over the years to transcribe 
earlier forms of Japanese. One of the most effective is Yale Romanization, a system 
devised by Samuel E. Martin of Yale University, primarily to make it easier to type on a 
typewriter without using diacritics. Syllabic distinctions are marked with on-glides or offglides, 
except in the case of otsu-rui o, which is underlined (hence, kye versus key, but 
kwo versus ko). Gerald B. Mathias, formerly of University of Hawai‘i, proposed the most 
comprehensive solution, where he used a three-way system, to designate kō and otsu-rui 
types, and yet keep a separate vowel to show ‘unmarked, unknown, or merged’ syllables: 
kĕ, kë, and ke (cf. Martin 1987:50). Another type of Romanization simply uses subscript 
numbers to refer to kō-rui (type one), otsu-rui (type two), and the unmarked vowel. 

To make this dictionary as accessible to as many specialists and non-specialists as 
possible, it was felt that a Romanization system that was highly accurate and yet not 
idiosyncratic in spellings would be the best to use. Recently Bjarke Frellesvig and John 
Whitman have proposed a modified system that I have adopted. Lined up with Yale 
Romanization, the major differences are as follows (C represents a consonant): 

 

Yale 

FW 

Cyi 

Ci 

Ciy 

Cwi 

Cye 

Cye 

Cey 

Ce 

Co 

Co 

Cwo 

Cwo 



 


I have relied on the following Romanization scheme for quoted examples: lower case 
italics for ongana (phonetic script), CAPITALS for kungana, and SMALL CAPITALS for 
logograms. I have used bold to highlight each entry specimen. Below is an example from 
Man’yōshū, which contains examples of all three types of writing: 

 

MYS 11 

吾勢子波 WA GA seKWO pa If my beloved does not 

借廬作良須 KARIPO TUKUrasu have thatch for the roof 

草無者 KAYA NAKU PA of the hut he is building, 

小松下乃 KWOMATU GA MOTO no then please cut some grass 

草乎苅核 KUSA wo KARASANE growing below the small pine. 

 

The first stanza contains several logograms (吾 WA ‘I’ and 子 KWO ‘child’) with ongana 
for se (勢) and the topic marker pa (波). Notice that in the third stanza the topic marker is 
now represented by a logogram (者). The final kanji in the fifth stanza, 核 ‘seed,’ is Old 
Japanese sane ‘seed,’ but here it is used as a kungana, calling to mind the honorific suffix, 
SANE ‘please (verb).’ 

When it is not apparent if a usage is a kungana or just a logogram, I have erred on the 
side of caution and have left the word marked as a logogram (in SMALL CAPITALS). This 
problem occurs with personal names, toponyms, and epithets (makura kotoba) when the 
meaning is unclear. I have also placed in square brackets words (usually case particles) 
where the value is assumed, but is not overtly represented in the text: 宇摩志阿斯訶備比 
古遲神 Umasi Asikabwi Pikwozi [NO] KAMWI. 

As far as the transliteration of Korean and Chinese, Korean has been rendered 
according to Yale Romanization, unless a reconstructed form is quoted. When modern 
Chinese has been quoted, it is written in the pinyin system. I have been forced to make 
one modification to the various Romanization systems I have used: any letter /a/ with 
diacritics in italics has become /a/ due to the limitations of the fonts. Thus: ảâạậấä have 
become ảâạậấä. However, Later Han preserves a distinction between /a/ and /ɑ/ (cf. 
Schuessler 2009:xix), and I have preserved that. 

 

 


ABBREVIATIONS 

 

 

BSS: Bussokuseki Kahi MYS: Man’yōshū 

CBS: Chang’an-based Stratum NA: Not Applicable 

EH: Eastern Han NKBT: Nihon koten bungaku taikei 

EJS: Early Japanese Stratum NOM: Chữ Nôm 

EMC: Early Middle Chinese NS: Nihon shoki 

FK: Fudoki NSG: Nihon shoki glosses 

GO: Go-on NSK: Nihon shoki kayo 

KG: Kojiki glosses NT: Norito 

KJK: Kojiki OC: Old Chinese 

KK: Kojiki kayo OJ: Old Japanese 

KN: Kan-on ONWC: Old Northwest Chinese 

LH: Later Han PBS: Paekche-based Stratum 

LJS: Late Japanese Stratum SK: Sino-Korean 

LMC: Late Middle Chinese SM: Senmyō 

LOC: Late Old Chinese SNG: Shoku Nihongi 

MGK: Man’yōgana no kenkyū SSI: Shōsōin documents 

MK: Mokkan SV: Sino-Vietnamese 

MKK: Mokkan kenkyū WS: Wei zhi Stratum 

MNZ: Motoori Norinaga zenshū 


LIST OF TEXTS CITED 

 

 

Atsuta daijingū engi 熱 田 大 神 宮 縁 起 (890 CE). This is a record of the 
establishment of the Atsuta Shrine in Owari Province (modern Nagoya). It contains six 
poems, two chōka and four tanka, all written in ongana, while the body of the text is in 
classical Chinese. The accuracy of the spellings shows that the orthography dates from 
the early Nara era, regardless that the record was compiled in the early Heian era. 

Bussokuseki kahi 仏足石歌碑 (ca. 755 CE). A long, thin stone slate in possession of 
Yakushiji Temple in Nara. Twenty-one poems are inscribed in the stone in man’yōgana. 
Miller (1975:1–7) provides an outline of the history of this monument. Other than a few 
sentences in Chinese, the majority of the inscription is ongana. 

Fudoki 風土記 (716 CE+). The court issued an edict in 713 that the various 
provinces were to compile gazetteers outlining geography, topography, legends, and 
other information about the locale. Five exist in something close to their original state: 
Hitachi fudoki 常陸風土記 (ca. 718), Harima fudoki 播磨風土記 (ca. 716), Izumo fudoki 
出雲風土記 (ca. 733), Bungo fudoki 豊後風土記 (ca. 740), and Hizen fudoki 肥前風土 
記 (dates unclear). Shaku Nihongi and Man’yōshū shō include many quotes from other 
Fudoki that have been lost. The text of these is mainly composed in Chinese, but many 
entries and notes contain ongana. 

Gangōji engi 元興寺縁起 (1165 CE). This is a record of the history of the Gangōji 
Temple in Yamato Prefecture, though the text is now housed at Daigoji Temple. The text 
mentions that a priest named Jishun compiled this record from an original record that has 
been lost. The colophon states that the original was compiled in 747. The text is mainly 
composed in Chinese. 

Jōgūki 上宮記 (dates unclear). A historical text like Kojiki or Nihon shoki. The text 
has been lost, and is known only through several fragments that survive, quoted in Shaku 
Nihongi, a commentary of Nihon shoki from the Kamakura era (ca. 1286), and Shōtoku 
Taishi heishiden zōkanmon (ca. 1314). Quotes from these fragments are composed in 
Chinese, but many personal and place names are preserved in ongana. 

Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu 上宮聖徳法王帝説 (ca. 1000 CE). This is a laconic, 
haphazard biographical work dealing with Prince Shōtoku. It is an important record, 
however, with information that supplements the text in Nihon shoki. The text in its 
current form dates from the Heian era, but much of the information is clearly older, some 
dating back to the Asuka era. Text is composed in Chinese, but it contains three poems 
and many names in ongana. 

Kakyō hyōshiki 歌経標式 (772 CE). This is a poetic treatise compiled by Fujiwara 
Hamanari (724–790), apparently by command of Emperor Kōnin (r. 770–781). It 
contains 34 poems, written in man’yōgana. The text outlines seven ‘poetic illnesses,’ or 
errors poets should avoid when writing poetry. The explanation is in Chinese, but the 
poetry is composed in ongana. 

Koryŏgi. (ca. 652 CE). A lost work with 13 fragments quoted in the surviving 
volume of Hanyuan (翰苑). The dating of the text is based on Yoshida (1977:12–17). 
The quotes are written in Chinese, but many Koguryŏ titles are written phonetically. 

Kojiki 古事記 (712 CE). Japan’s oldest existing history, compiled by Ō no Yasumaro 
(d. 723), by command of Emperor Genmei (r. 707–715). It contains a record of the 
mythology, and a mytho-historical outline of Japan’s first 33 rulers of Japan, from Jinmu 


till Suiko. Man’yōgana is used in a consistent way to preserve the poetry, and many 
important words in the text. It contains 112 songs. See Bentley (2012:58–63) for an 
outline. The text is mainly in a kundoku orthography. 

Man’yōshū 万葉集 (ca. 771 CE). Japan’s oldest poetic anthology, containing roughly 
4,500 poems in 20 volumes. Because of its use of phonograms, scholars named the 
system man’yōgana after its title. However, more than half of the poetry is written in 
Chinese, or kungana that is deciphered through a kundoku process. Because some 
information has been lost over time, a number of poems are difficult to decipher in the 
present. The text is quite heterogeneous, with some poetry in pure ongana, some in a 
mixture, and some in kundoku orthography. There are even a few written completely in 
Chinese. 

Mokkan 木簡. These are wooden slips used for documentation at the Asuka and Nara 
courts, and continued to be used into the Edo era. Many are tags attached to tribute 
shipped to the court, but others contain correspondence, and some contain calligraphy 
practice and poetry. Presently almost 400,000 have been excavated from a variety of 
places throughout Japan. The earliest datable slip is from 648, excavated from Ōtemae in 
Ōsaka. Currently over 50,000 slips have been cataloged in an on-line Mokkan database 
that has greatly facilitated my research: (http://www.nabunken.go.jp/Open/mokkan/ 
mokkan.html). 

Nihongi shiki 日本紀私記 (721–965 CE). Seven lectures on the text of Nihon shoki 
were held at court over the course of more than two centuries, and at each a scribe kept 
minutes (私記), leaving us an account of the lecture. While many of these have been lost, 
fragments have survived in four different manuscripts. Many of these contain 
man’yōgana readings of difficult graphs or compounds. The body of the text is mainly 
written in Chinese. 

Nihon shoki 日本書紀 (720 CE). This is Japan’s first official history, and lacks a 
preface. Shoku Nihongi notes that it was compiled by a committee headed by Prince 
Toneri. This work is important because it was compiled from a rich cache of documents, 
some with connections to the various kingdoms on the peninsula. It also contains 128 
songs. The phonograms used in the text are more complex than Kojiki, perhaps because 
the text was compiled in imitation of Wen xuan, which also uses obscure characters. The 
record covers the mytho-history from the beginning to the eleventh year of Jitō (697). See 
Bentley (2012:58–63) for an outline. Aside from the poetry and annotational notes, the 
text is written in Chinese. 

Norito 祝詞 (927 CE). The record Engi shiki (927 CE) contains 27 of these liturgies, 
while Taiki bekki (台記別記 ca. 1155 CE) contains one, for a total of 28 liturgies. For 
this dictionary, I have only used 16 that exhibit a high degree of accurate, etymological 
spellings according to the Asuka-Nara tradition. See Bentley (2001) for a list of these. 
The text is written in kundoku orthography. 

Paekche materials. Three Paekche histories, Paekchegi, Paekche pongi, and Paekche 
sinch’an are quoted in Nihon shoki fairly extensively. The dating of these texts is difficult 
to ascertain, but which appear to be older than the Tenmu era (r. 673–686). These three 
histories contain many names and toponyms written in an orthography clearly related to 
that used by the Japanese, but which is also independent and older. The text is written in 
Chinese. 

Ryō no shūge 令集解 (ca. 875 CE). This is a commentary on the legal document of 
the Yōrō Codes, with reference to the earlier Taihō Codes. This work was compiled in 50 


volumes, but only 36 survive in the present. It quotes from Koki ‘an old record’ that 
contains man’yōgana that scholars have tentatively dated to the early Nara era. The text 
is written in Chinese. 

Sendai kuji hongi 先代旧事紀 (dates uncertain). A much maligned work that travels 
the same mythological path as Kojiki and Nihon shoki. It is compiled in 10 volumes, and 
includes a detailed genealogy of Susanoo, the Owari and Mononobe families, and a list of 
the provinces and governors. See Bentley (2006) for an explanation of the disputed 
authenticity of this work. The text is written in a mixture of Chinese and kundoku 
orthography. The poetry is written in ongana. 

Shinsen jikyō 新撰字鏡 (ca. 900 CE). A Chinese character dictionary that also gives 
Japanese readings for many characters in man’yōgana. The compiler of this dictionary 
demonstrates that he still knew the distinction in spelling between kwo and ko. 

Shinsen shōjiroku 新撰姓氏緑 (815 CE). Compiled by imperial decree, this record 
lists the genealogies and family histories of 335 families who claimed descent from the 
imperial deities, 404 families who claimed descent from non-imperial deities, and 326 
families who migrated from the continent (Paekche, Koguryŏ, Silla, and China). Some of 
the family histories contain names written in man’yōgana. 

Shoku Nihongi 続日本紀 (797 CE). The second imperially decreed history. It picks 
up the story where Nihon shoki left off, covering the years from 698 till 791, which is the 
10th year of Emperor Kanmu. It contains eight poems, but more importantly, contains 62 
imperial edicts written in senmyō-tai, preserving important clues to the usage and 
grammar or Nara era Japanese. See Bentley (2012:64–67) for an outline. 

‘Shōsōin Documents’ 正倉院文書 (702–1836 CE). These are documents housed in 
the Shōsōin, a repository located within the precincts of the Tōdaiji Temple in Nara. It 
contains some 11,000 artifacts and documents. Many of these are written in Chinese, but 
a number of documents are written out in man’yōgana. The various early censuses belong 
to this group of documents. 

Wamyō ruijushō 倭名類聚鈔 (ca. 938 CE). This is an encyclopedia, compiled by 
Minamoto Shigau (911–983). Part of this is a character dictionary, listing Chinese words, 
and giving a reading in Japanese, in man’yōgana. Another section contains a 
geographical list of provinces, districts, and villages, often with man’yōgana readings for 
names. 

 

 


A 

 

 

阿 


OJ: a OC: *ʔâ 

LH: ʔa EMC: ʔa GO: a KN: a 

NOM: a SV: a SK: a 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in the Han section of Wei zhi 
in 名樂浪人爲阿殘。東方人名我爲阿、謂樂浪人本其殘餘人 “They call 
people from Lelang *ʔa-dzan. This is because the people in the east call 
themselves *ʔa, because people from Lelang believe they were originally left 
behind.” 

This phonogram also appears on an inscription on a Paekche Buddhist rock 
monument, in the word 阿耨多羅, which is a transcription for Anavatapta, a 
sacred place in Buddhism. Other examples of 阿 appear on the Kwangkaytho 
stele: 阿旦城 *A-tan Fortress and 阿利水 *A-ri River. 

Also an example of this phonogram appears in the place name Aswo (阿蘇), 
a famous active volcano located in what is now modern Kumamoto Prefecture 
(modern Mt. Aso). The name of this volcano also appears in the Chinese record, 
Suishu, dated about 656. The earliest attestation is in Nihon shoki, but likely this 
record has relied on an earlier source. 

The phonogram 阿 is also used in the record Paekche record, Paekchegi, 
quoted in the record of Jingū, 阿首至 Asuti, a personal name and in the name of 
a prince of Paekche who later became king: 阿花 Akuwe (later known as King 
Chinsa). Traditional names like Ape (阿倍) and ADUMI (阿曇) may owe their 
orthography to Paekche and its scribes. 

This phonogram also appears in the earliest extant materials. In the Jōgūki 
fragment are the names 阿加波智君 Akapati kimi and 阿那爾比彌 Anani 
Pimye. This also appears in a poem preserved in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu, 
supposedly written not long after the death of Shōtoku Taishi. 

美加弥乎須 mikami wosu Mount Tabasami 

多婆佐美夜麻乃 tabasami yama no that rules from above; 

阿遅加気尓 adikake ni alas, I stood there 

比止乃麻乎之志 pito no mawosisi in the shade of the aji, 

和何於保支美波母 wa ga opokimi pamo begging our master’s return. 

This phonogram appears in the liturgies: 生井栄井津長井阿須波婆比伎登 
御名者 IKUWI SAKUWI TUNGAWI asupa papiki to MINA PA ‘We declare the names 
of the deities Ikui, Sakui, Tsunagai, Asuwa, and Hahiki…” (NT 1). 

Other examples include: 宇摩志阿斯訶備比古遲神 the deity Umasi 
Asikabwi Pikwodi (KG), and 阿那迩夜志愛上袁登古袁 ana ni ya si e wotokwo 
wo ‘oh my, what a wonderful young man’ (KG). 

KK 53 

淤志弖流夜 ositeru ya When I came out and stood 

那爾波能佐岐用 nanipa no saki ywo looking at my land from 

伊傳多知弖 idetatite the cape of Naniwa 


和賀久迩美禮婆 wa ga kuni mireba shining brilliantly 

阿波志麻 apa sima I can see even 

淤能碁呂志摩 onogoro sima Awa Island 

阿遲麻佐能 adimasa no and Onogoro Island 

志麻母美由 sima mo miyu and the island with betel palms. 

佐氣都志麻美由 saketusima miyu I see Sake Island. 

This phonogram is also the primary graph in Nihon shoki, used 21 times in 
annotational notes and found in 72 of the 128 poems: 荒魂、此云阿邏瀰多摩 
“ ‘violent spirit’ is read aramitama” (NSG) 

NSK 30 

阿布彌能彌 apumi no mi I have lost sight 

齋多能和多利珥 seta no watari ni of the birds that dove here 

伽豆區苔利 kaduku tori at the Seta Ferry 

梅珥志彌曳泥麼 me nisi miyeneba on the sea of Afumi. 

異枳廼倍呂之茂 ikidoporosi mo How irritating that is! 

This phonogram also appears 221 times in Man’yōshū, making it the second 
most popular phonogram after 安, which is used 897 times. 

MYS 808 

多都乃麻乎 tatu no ma wo I will go in search 

阿礼波毛等米牟 are pa motomemu for the dragon horse— 

阿遠尓与志 awo ni yosi for the people who are 

奈良乃美夜古邇 nara no miyakwo ni returning to the capital of Nara 

許牟比等乃多仁 komu pito no tani where the green earth is good. 

The simplified form of this graph 阿 later becomes katakana ア. 

 

安 


OJ: a, ana OC: *ʔân 

LH: ʔɑn EMC: ʔân GO: amu, a KN: an 

NOM: an SV: an SK: an 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS, though Ōno (1962:141) claims it is a 
rather new development in the orthography of Japan. The phonogram is never 
used as a phonogram for a in Kojiki, and does not appear in the so-called Suikoera 
inscriptions (our EJS). The genealogy in Kujiki, which I date from around 
684, transcribes the name Adumi as 阿曇 (Kamata 1980:22), while Nihon shoki 
continues to write the name in this fashion. The earliest preserved example of 
Adumi written 安曇 is found in the Awaji Tax Register from 738. Shoku 
Nihongi records the name with 阿 until 761 (Aoki et. al. 1989.3:369). A mokkan 
excavated from the ancient Fujiwara Palace (694–710) contains this fragment: 
安芸国安芸□ agi [NO] KUNI agi X ‘Agi (District?) of Agi Province…’ (MK 
1188). 

Regardless of this information, the Paekche orthographic pool casts serious 
doubt on Ōno’s dating. The phonogram 安 appears in names based on Paekche 
records a total of 22 times. Consider these two examples: 

i) 安羅 the place name Ara (sometimes transcribed as Alla). 

ii) 安多村 the village of Ata. 

The Kwangkaytho stele of the ancient Koguryŏ kingdom also records Ara as 
安羅, meaning that perhaps the name was originally pronounced Anla, or close to 


that. Regardless, looking at the interlinear readings, neither name is read an; all 
cases of 安 in the Paekche records appear to be transcribing a. It is just as 
plausible, however, that some kind of prenasalization was being preserved, 
because there is a final nasal in all cases (OC to the present—perhaps the 
toponym is actually closer to anda). A cautious approach is to interpret these 
names as an-. For the time being I date this phonogram from the PBS. 

Of the 128 poems in Shoki, syllable-initial a appears 125 times, with 阿 
used 117 times. The other eight examples use 婀. The only evidence that is 
difficult to explain is the stone or metal inscriptions. The name 張安 appears on 
the Eta Funayama tumulus sword inscription (fifth century), but this is likely the 
name of a person of continental birth. 

There are a few examples where this phonogram is read ana, such as in 
Harima fudoki in the toponym 安師 Anasi. 

This phonogram gained wide popularity into the Nara era and the cursive 
form is the basis for what is now kana あ. 

 

婀 


OJ: a OC: NA 

LOC: *ʔa EMC: ʔa GO: a KN: a 

NOM: a SV: ả SK: a 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and is only used in Nihon shoki, and 
then only in the poetry eight times, with two other instances in the commentary, 
both in the “Age of the Gods” sections. There are several other examples in 
scattered fragments from various Fudoki, but these are difficult to date and I have 
elected to ignore these for the time being. This phonogram also does not appear 
in Izumo fudoki, the most reliable of all the geographical gazetteers. 

Examples include: 大己貴命此云於褒婀娜武智, “The name ‘大己貴命’ is 
read opo anamuti” (NSG). 

NSK 92 

擧騰我瀰儞 kotogami ni The shadow above the zither 

枳謂屢箇皚必謎 kiwiru kage pimye of my beloved-to-be— 

頴摩儺羅磨 tama naraba if she were a jewel, 

婀我裒屢柁摩能 a ga poru tama no she would be my favorite kind: 

婀波寐之羅陀魔 apabi siradama a white pearl from an abalone. 

 

鞅 


OJ: a OC: *ʔaŋ 

LOC: *ʔɨɑŋ EMC: ʔɨaŋ GO: au KN: yau 

NOM: anh SV: ảnh SK: ang 

Usage / History: 

This rare phonogram belongs to the CBS, appearing only in the record of 
Shoki. To be precise, the phonogram appears but three times, in commentary 
dealing with readings of terms associated with the story of Jinmu. Those three 
examples are: 1) 一柱騰宮、阿斯毘苔徒鞅餓離能宮 “ ‘A palace with one 
pillar,’ read asi pitotu agari no MIYA” (NSG); 2) 大醜此云、鞅奈瀰爾句 
“ ‘How ugly’ is read ana miniku” (NSG); 3) 妍哉此云、鞅奈珥夜 “ ‘How 
beautiful’ is read ana ni ya (NSG). 


吾 


OJ: a OC: *ŋâ 

LH: ŋɑ > ŋɔ EMC: ŋɔ GO: go KN: go 

NOM: ngo SV: ngô SK: wo 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ a ‘I, me.’ What is more difficult to 
explain is when this development took place. This usage appears in both Kojiki 
and Shoki, but does not appear in the Suiko era corpus, or the Paekche 
orthographical pool. This usage may actually be a Japanese invention, rather than 
a change influenced by a peninsular system. 

Ōno only says that this phonogram is grouped with 足 asi・我 are, 
because these two kungana also function as suggesting just the initial syllable 
(1962:197). This is merely a superficial statement, and tells us very little. It is 
probably true that the three phonograms were used semantically in the same era, 
but the era in question is left to the imagination of the reader. 

My theory is that this is an invention from around the time of the era of Tenji 
(r. 662–671), when Chinese scholars came to court and a new set of phonological 
standards for phonograms was instituted (cf. Mori 1991). 

 

足 


OJ: a OC: *tsok 

LH: tsiok EMC: tsuawk GO: soku, su KN: syoku, syu 

NOM: túc SV: túc SK: sywok, swu 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ a ‘leg,’ which is a truncated form of asi. In 
the Mino Census of 702 we find two names, 足結 AYUPI and 足結賣 
AYUPImye. This usage appears only once in Kojiki: 足取王 Prince ATORI. 
Interestingly this same name appears in Nihon shoki as 臘嘴鳥皇子 Prince 
ATORI (臘嘴鳥 refers to the brambling). Likewise, there is only one example of 
this kungana in Nihon shoki: 足往 AYUKI (NSG). 

This kungana appears a number of times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1718 

足利思代 ADWOMOPITE The ships whose sailors called 

榜行舟薄 KWOGI INISI PUNE pa back and forth as they rowed 

高嶋之 TAKASIMA NO probably have now 

足速之水門尓 ADWO NO MINATWO ni reached the port 

極尓監鴨 PATEnikyemu KAMO of Ado at Takashima. 

 

嗚呼 



OJ: a OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: NA GO: NA KN: NA 

NOM: NA SV: NA SK: NA 

Usage / History: 

These two kunganas are actually a Chinese phrase, as 嗚呼 means ‘to sigh.’ 
This phrase thus represents the sound of a sigh in Old Japanese: a. This usage 
appears only once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 40 

嗚呼見乃浦尓 AMI no URA ni Is the tide rising to meet 

船乗為良武 PUNANORISUramu the jewel-like skirts 

𡢳嬬等之 WOTOMYERA GA of the young maidens 


珠裳乃須十二 TAMAMO no suSWO ni who try to board the boat 

四寳三都良武香 sipo MIturamu KA at Ami Bay? 

 

英 



OJ: aga, a OC: *ʔraŋ 

LH: ʔɨaŋ EMC: ʔiajŋ GO: au KN: ei 

NOM: anh, yêng SV: anh SK: yeng 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. Several toponyms using this phonogram 
appear on excavated mokkan: 英比郷 Agapi Village (MK 2188), 美作国英多 
郡大野里 Misaka Province, Agata District, OPONWO Village (MK 439). It 
transcribes a in Man’yōshū. It appears in the headnote to MYS 4093: 英遠浦 
Awo URA ‘Bay of Ao.’ It also transcribes a in Harima fudoki, in place names like 
英保 Apo and 英賀 Aga. It also transcribes aga in the place name 英馬 
Agama. This phonogram also appears in Shoku Nihongi to transcribe 英多 
Agata (713.4.3). These latter two examples show that the scribes used the velarnasal 
final plus an echo vowel to represent ga. 

 

惡 


OJ: aku OC: *ʔâk 

LH: ʔak EMC: ʔak GO: a, aku KN: aku 

NOM: anh, yêng SV: anh SK: yeng 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It is an extremely rare phonogram, as the 
semantics of the character made it unpopular: 惡 means ‘evil’ or ‘hate.’ There are 
four manuscripts of Hokekyō ongi where 惡 is glossed a (Ogura 1995, 2:222, 
1208–1209). However, in classical Chinese this character could also be used as an 
emphatic. The earliest usage of aku appears in the Buzen Census of 702: 秦部惡 
閉 PADABYE Akupe. In the Izumo tax payment register of 739 we find the name 
惡多賣 Akutamye. On a wooden tablet excavated from the old Nara capital area 
we find the name 坂田真人惡麻呂 SAKATA MABITO Akumaro (MK 4901), and 
on a different tablet 坂田惡万呂 SAKATA Akumaro (MK 4902). From the ruins 
of the Akita Castle an excavated wooden document contains the name 大伴部惡 
男 OPOTOMOBYE AkuWO (MK 126). 

 

菴 


OJ: ama OC: *ʔam 

LH: ʔəm or ʔɨam EMC: ʔəm > ʔam GO: amu KN: amu 

NOM: NA SV: am SK: am 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Shoku Nihongi, in the third 
year of Monmu in the place name 菴美 Amami (699.7.19). Here the initial 
vowel has an echo vowel in the second syllable. 

 

奄 


OJ: ama, amu OC: *ʔramʔ 

LH: ʔɨəmʔ EMC: ʔiam GO: emu KN: emu 

NOM: im SV: yểm SK: em 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in Shoku Nihongi, used to 
transcribe two different disyllables, ama and amu: 奄美 Amami (714.12.5), 奄 
智王 Prince Amuti (757.8.18). 

 

闇 


OJ: amu OC: *ʔəmʔ or *ʔəms 

LH: ʔəmh or ʔəmh EMC: ʔəm > ʔam GO: amu KN: amu 

NOM: NA SV: am, ám SK: am 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in the name 闇知 Amuti, 
preserved in the Shōsōin documents. 

 

鴨 


OJ: apa OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: ʔaɨp LMC: ʔja:p GO: efu KN: afu 

NOM: NA SV: áp SK: ap 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This usage appears in Harima fudoki in 
the toponym 鴨波里 Apapa Village. 

 

姶 


OJ: api OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: NA GO: afu KN: afu 

NOM: NA SV: ạp SK: ap 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Shoku Nihongi in 姶袷郡 
ApiRA District (713.4.3), and 姶𡤢郡 Apira District (729.7.22). 

 

愛 


OJ: ayu OC: *ʔə̂ ts 

LH: ʔəs > ʔəh EMC: ʔəj LMC: ʔaj GO: ai KN: ai 

NOM: ái SV: ái SK: oy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Shoku Nihongi in the 
toponym 尾張國愛知郡 WOPARI Province, Ayuti District (709.5.5). Documents 
in Shōsōin also contain the usage 愛智郡 Ayuti District. 

 


B 

 

 

婆 



OJ: ba OC: *bâ 

LH: bɑi EMC: bwâ GO: ba KN: fa 

NOM: bà SV: ba, bà SK: pha 

Usage / History: 

When used to transcribe ba, this phonogram belongs to the EJS. It appears in 
one of the songs preserved in Jōgū shōtoku hōō teisetsu: 

伊加留我乃 ikaruga no Our Great Ruler’s name 

止美能乎何波乃 tomi no wogapa no will never be forgotten, 

多叡婆許曾 tayeba koso even if the brook 

和何於保支美乃 wa ga opokimi no Tomi in Ikaruga 

弥奈和須良叡米 mina wasurayeme should cease to flow in its bed. 

This phonogram appears on a variety of mokkan: □□部佐婆万呂 XXBYE 
Sabamaro (MKK 11:27), 阿波蘇部止婆 apaswoBYEtoba, which may be a 
name (unnumbered tablet), and a strange fragment: □把伊麻婆礼婆 …X pa i 
mabareba ‘when gazing at…?’ (MKK 12:138). 

This phonogram is the primarily graph used to transcribe ba in Kojiki: 

KK 9 

古那美賀 kwonami ga If your first wife 

那許波佐婆 na kopasaba asks for a side dish, 

多知曾婆能 tatisoba no cut her slices of meat 

微能那祁久袁 mwi no nakyeku wo with almost no flesh— 

許紀志斐惠泥 kokwisipwiwene barren like the hawthorn. 

宇波那理賀 upanari ga If your favorite wife 

那許波佐婆 na kopasaba asks for a side dish, 

伊知佐加紀 itisakakwi cut her many slices of meat 

微能意富祁久袁 mwi no opokyeku wo like the hisakaki fruit 

許紀陀斐惠泥 kokwidapwiwene blessed in abundance. 

This phonogram is rarely used in Nihon shoki to transcribe ba, because it is 
primarily used to transcribe pa. Two examples of this graph appear in Shoki for 
ba (NSK 2, 116), of which I quote one: 

NSK 116 

伊磨紀那屢 imakwi naru Above the knoll 

乎武例我禹杯爾 womure ga upe ni that is Imaki— 

倶謨娜尼母 kumo dani mo if even a cloud 

旨屢倶之多々婆 sirukusi tataba would clearly rise up 

那爾柯那皚柯武 nani ka nagekamu then I would not lament. 

This graph also appears on the Bussoku stele: 

BSS 16 

己乃美阿止乎 kono miato wo Respectfully gazing 

麻婆利麻都礼婆 mabarimatureba at these footprints, 

阿止奴志乃 ato nusi no how we think of 


多麻乃与曾保比 tama no yosopopi the jeweled figure of the owner 

於母保由留可母 omopoyuru kamo of these footprints. 

美留期止毛阿留可 miru goto mo aru ka As if we see him! 

Miller (1975:147) treats 婆 as pa (his Fa) in this poem, and then chides the 
editors of Jidai betsu kokugo daijiten for flip-flopping, listing the word with Fa, 
but giving the possibility that it may actually be ba. In reality, Miller has 
misrepresented the editors, because the word in question is listed as mabaru, 
interpreted as a form of mimamoru ‘gaze, look at’; later the editors say, “Some 
believe this to be mafaru, but the chance that 婆 is a voiced syllable is high” 
(1967:688). A cursory look at the phonology, however, shows that the Jidai betsu 
editors are right, and Miller is mistaken. If 婆 represents pa, then this 
necessitates a LMC (CBS) reading, which is odd in a poem composed of EMC 
(EJS) graphs. Consider that 太 in poems 2, 4, 6 is read da, not ta, and 奴 in 
poem 16 is read nu and not dwo, each of these readings which Miller agrees with. 
Consider this poem: 

BSS 19 

与都乃閇美 yotu no pemi What a despicable body, 

伊都々乃毛乃乃 itutu no mono no an accumulation of 

阿都麻礼流 atumareru the four serpents and 

伎多奈伎微乎婆 kitanaki mwi woba the five demons— 

伊止比須都閇志 itopisutu besi We must resist and discard them, 

波奈礼須都倍志 panaresutu besi depart and discarding them. 

Here again Miller (1975:160) treats 乎婆 as woFa, which is difficult to 
fathom. The graph 婆 is used three times in the Bussoku Stele sequence, each 
time for ba, and when the poet(s) wishes to represent pa, he uses 波 instead. In 
conclusion, 婆 in these poems represents ba. 

This phonogram is also the primary graph used to transcribe ba in 
Man’yōshū: 

MYS 3617 

伊波婆之流 ipabasiru When I hear the sound 

多伎毛登杼呂尓 taki mo todoro ni of the cicada, a voice 

鳴蝉乃 NAKU SEMI no like a waterfall rushing 

許恵乎之伎氣婆 kowe wosi kikeba over the boulders— 

京師之於毛保由. MIYAKWOsi omopoyu I think of the metropolis. 

 

伐 


OJ: ba OC: *bat 

LH: buɑt EMC: bjwɐt GO: bati KN: fatu 

NOM: phạt SV: phạt SK: pel 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and is only found in Man’yōshū. I have 
only found six examples. Below is a representative example: 

MYS 3583 

真幸而 MASAKIKUTE If my beloved performs 

伊毛我伊波伴伐 imwo ga ipapaba purification rituals for my safety, 

於伎都奈美 okitunami even if the waves in the offing 

知敝尓多都等母 tipye ni tatu tomo pile up a thousand times, 

佐波里安良米也母 sapari arame yamo would there be any obstacles? 


麼 


OJ: ba OC: *maiʔ 

LH: mɨɑiʔ EMC: ma LMC: mba GO: ma KN: ba 

NOM: NA SV: mả SK: ma 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This graph is primarily used to 
transcribe ba in Nihon shoki, used 36 times in poetry, and once in an annotational 
note: 訕哤、此云佐麼賣玖 ‘make a racket’ is read sabameku’ (NSG). 

NSK 97 

莒母唎矩能 kumoriku no In the hidden land, 

簸覩細能哿波庚 patuse no kapa yu the bamboo flowing down 

那峨礼倶屢 nagarekuru the Hatsuse River— 

駄開能 take no wonderful, flourishing bamboo 

以矩美娜開余嚢開 ikumidake yodake with long joints and leaves. 

謨等陛嗚麼 motopye woba We will make a koto 

莒等儞都倶唎 koto ni tukuri out of the base of it, 

須衞陛嗚麼 suwepye woba and make a flute 

府曳儞都倶唎 puye ni tukuri out of the top of it, 

符企儺須 pukinasu and our music 

美母慮我紆陪儞 mimoro ga upe ni will reach to the top 

能朋梨陀致 nobori tati of Mount Mimoro. 

倭我彌細麼 wa ga miseba When I gaze down 

都奴娑播符 tunwo sapapu on Iware Pond 

以簸例能伊開能 ipare no ike no with rocks covered in vines 

美那矢駄府 minasitapu even the fish 

紆鳴謨 uwo mo come to the surface 

紆陪儞堤堤那皚矩 upe ni dete nageku and lament your parting. 

 

魔 


OJ: ba OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: ma LMC: mba GO: ma KN: ba 

NOM: ma SV: ma SK: ma 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in two songs in Nihon shoki. 
Below is one example: 

NSK 91 

於彌能姑能 omi no kwo no The son of the Omi has 

耶賦能之魔柯枳 yapu no sibakaki made a fine brushwood fence. 

始陀騰余瀰 sitatoyomi But if the earth quakes 

那爲我與釐據魔 nawi ga yori koba that brushwood fence 

耶黎夢之魔柯枳 yaremu sibakaki will likely fall to pieces. 

 

磨 


OJ: ba OC: *mâ 

LH: mɑi > ma EMC: ma LMC: mba GO: ma KN: ba 

NOM: mài SV: ma, mạ SK: ma 

Usage / History: 

I have included this phonogram here, though textual analysis tends to show 
that this graph may have been consistently corrupted to 縻. Following the careful 
textual analysis of the NKBT editors, it appears that the eight possible examples 


of 磨 as ba are all corruptions of 麼. In other words, the phonogram 磨 is only 
used in Nihon shoki to transcribe ma. Thus the phonogram 麼 appears to have 
been corrupted into rare examples of 磨 and 縻 to represent ba. 

 

 



薄 


OJ: ba OC: *bâk 

LH: bak EMC: bâk GO: baku KN: faku 

NOM: bạc SV: bác SK: pak 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. Here the final -ku is ignored. This usage 
only appears in Man’yōshū, and then only three times (in MYS 3329 and 3330). 

MYS 3330 

衣社薄 KINU KOSO ba And like a robe 

其破者 SORE YARENUREBA if one were to rip it 

継乍物 TUGITUTU mo they say you can sew it together 

又母相登言 MATA mo APU to IPYE and the torn pieces meet again. 

玉社者 TAMA KOSO BA And like a string of jewels 

緒之絶薄 WO NO TAYENUREba if the string breaks 

八十一里喚鶏 KUKUriTUTU the say that you can restring it 

又物逢登曰 MATA mo APU to IPYE and the jewels meet again. 

又毛不相物者 MATA mo APANU MONO PA However it is my spouse 

孋尓志有来 TUMA ni si ARIKERI who I will never meet again. 

 

倍 


OJ: be OC: *bə̂ ʔ 

LH: bəʔ EMC: bwậiʔ GO: bai KN: fai 

NOM: bội, vội SV: bội SK: poy, phay 

Usage / History: 

The phonogram belongs to the EJS. This phonogram appears in the Mino 
Census of 702 in names such as 古安倍 Kwoabe, and 小倍志賣 KWObe 
Simye. This phonogram also appears on a variety of excavated mokkan: 阿倍枚 
万呂 Abe MUTImaro (MK 3508), 安倍 Abe (MKK 17:163). It also appears 
twice in the liturgies: 上津国乎所知食倍志 UPATU KUNI wo SIROSIMESU besi 
‘(You) should rule over the upper land’ (NT 12). 

This phonogram is prevalent in Kojiki: 阿倍臣 Abe OMI (KG). 

KK 26 

迦賀那倍弖 kaganabete Lining up the days 

用迩波許許能用 ywo nipa kokono ywo for nights nine nights; 

比迩波登袁加袁 pi nipa towoka wo for days ten days (have passed). 

Theoretically there should be no examples of 倍 for be in Nihon shoki 
poetry, as the Late Middle Chinese reading of this graph had devoiced to *pɦuaj, 
and therefore was available to transcribe pe (which see). Thus Mori’s three 
examples of be in the poetry requires comment (cf. 1991:236), but I will limit 
data to the stanza in question. In the story of Yamato Takeru going to subdue the 
rebels in the east, we have the same song (NSK 26) as found above in KK 26: 伽 
餓奈倍氐 kaganabete ‘lining up the days.’ The second example occurs in a song 
from Ingyō (NSK 65): 勾倍枳豫臂奈利 ku beki yopi nari “it is the early 
evening when (my husband) will come....” The final example is in Suiko’s reply 
poem to Soga Umako (NSK 103): 宇倍之訶茂 ubesi kamo “How true it is.” As 


all three examples appear in the beta section of poetry (which is the older stratum 
of poetry), two possibilities come to mind. First, the compilers of these books in 
Nihon shoki have failed to convert this phonogram which might have been found 
in the source documents to another graph, such as 陪; second, the more likely 
scenario is that because LMC had no voiced *b or prenasalized *mb, the 
compilers had no other choice but to adhere to the earlier usage. 

This phonogram is the principal graph for be in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 798 

伊毛何美斯 imwo ga misi The blossoms of the bead tree 

阿布知乃波那波 aputi no pana pa that my beloved saw 

知利奴倍斯 tirinu besi must have scattered— 

和何那久那美多 wa ga naku namida though my tears 

伊摩陀飛那久尓 imada pwi naku ni have not yet dried. 

 

陪 


OJ: be OC: *bə̂ 

LH: bə EMC: bwậi GO: bai KN: fai 

NOM: bồi SV: bồi SK: poy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage is quite rare, most likely 
being simply a variant usage of 倍. There is an example from the Shōsōin 
documents where the name Abe is represented as 阿陪. 

This phonogram also appears six times in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 63 

夜輸瀰始之 yasumisisi Our great sovereign 

和我於朋枳瀰波 wa ga opokimi pa who rules the eight quarters 

于陪儺于陪儺 ube na ube na has spoken reasonably 

和例烏斗波輸儺 ware wo twopasu na by asking this question of me. 

阿企菟辭摩 akitusima But I have not heard 

揶莽等能倶珥々 yamato no kuni ni anything about a goose 

箇利古武等 kari kwomu to having laid an egg 

和例破枳箇儒 ware pa kikazu in the land of Yamato. 

 

毎 


OJ: be OC: *mǝ̂ ʔ 

LH: məʔ EMC: mwậi LMC: bmuaj GO: mai KN: bai 

NOM: mỗi, mọi SV: mỗi SK: moy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, appearing but once in Nihon shoki, in 
an annotational note: 諾、此云宇毎那利 “ ‘approval’ is read ube nari” (NSG). 

 

鼻 


OJ: bi OC: *bit or *bits 

LH: bit or bis EMC: bjiet or bih GO: bi KN: fi 

NOM: NA SV: tị, tĩ SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. In the second year of Kimmei, seventh 
month, a Paekche delegation is sent to Mimana to chastise their disloyalty to 
Japan. One member of the delegation is named Birimakkwo, 鼻利莫古. Then in 
the fourth year, 12th month, this same person is seen again. This usage was 


inherited by the Wa. This phonogram appears once in the annotational notes in 
Nihon shoki: 汝此云那鼻苔 “ ‘You’ is to be read nabito.” 

This phonogram is also used once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 57 

引馬野尓 PIKUmaNWO ni With vibrant beauty the plain 

仁保布榛原 nipopu PARIPARA of black alders in Hikumano— 

入乱 IRIMIDARE venture within and stain 

衣尓保波勢 KOROMO nipopase your robes with their beauty 

多鼻能知師尓 tabi no SIRUsi ni as a mark of your journey. 

This phonogram appears in the first poem of the Bussoku sequence: 

BSS 1 

美阿止都久留 miato tukuru The resounding sound of 

伊志乃比鼻伎波 isi no pibiki pa the rock where the footprints 

阿米尓伊多利 ame ni itari are carved reaches to heaven; 

都知佐閇由須礼 tuti sape yusure the earth even reverberates. 

知々波々賀多米尓 titi papa ga tame ni For father and mother— 

毛呂比止乃多米尓 moropito no tame ni for all people. 

 

毘 


OJ: bi OC: *bi 

LH: bi EMC: bji GO: bi KN: fi 

NOM: NA SV: tì, bì SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, though its use appears to have been 
somewhat limited. It is often written as 毗. This phonogram appears on a variety 
of wooden tablets excavated from the Fujiwara (694–710) and Heijō (710–784) 
palaces: 志毗年 Sibi TOSI (MK 855), and 海毗登 UMIbito ‘sea folk’ (MK 
7526). 

This graph is perhaps well known because of its use in Kojiki to almost 
exclusively transcribe bi, as the following illustrate: 波迩夜須毘古 Paniyasu 
bikwo ‘Prince Paniyasu’ (KG), 曾毘良迩 sobira ni ‘on his back’ (KG), 須世理 
毘賣 Suseri bimye ‘Princess Suseri’ (KG), and 若倭根子日子大毘毘命 WAKA 
YAMATO NEKWO PIKWO OPObibi [NO] MIKOTO (KG). 

KK 81 

美夜比登能 miyabito no They say that the small bell 

阿由比能古須受 ayupi no kwosuzu on the leg strap of 

淤知爾岐登 otiniki to the courtier have fallen off 

美夜比登登余牟 miyabito toyomu and he is making a fuss. 

佐斗毘登母由米 satwobito mo yume You villagers also beware. 

This phonogram is found once in the Buzen census of 702, in the name 阿蘇 
毘 Aswobi. This graph appears 11 times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1028 

大夫之 MASURAWO NO As a valiant man 

高圓山尓 TAKAMATO YAMA ni had chased it into a corner 

迫有者 SEMETAREBA on Mount Takamato, 

里尓下来流 SATWO ni ORIKYEru it fled down to the village, 

牟射佐毘曽此 musasabi so KORE a flying squirrel, this one! 

 


婢 

OJ: bi OC: *beʔ 

LH: bieʔ EMC: bjieʔ GO: bi KN: fi 

NOM: tì SV: tì SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Shoku Nihongi, in the 
edicts: 惡久穢心乎以天逆尓在謀乎起、臣等方己我比伎婢企是尓託彼尓依都都頑 
尓無礼伎心乎念弖 ASIku KITANAKI KOKORO wo MOTIte SAKASIMA ni ARU PAKARI 
KOTO wo TATE, OMITATI pa ONO ga pikibiki KORE ni YORItutu KATAKUNA ni 
WIYANAki KOKORO wo OMOPIte ‘(You) made plans that go against reason with 
evil and wicked hearts, and the Omi and others, each in their own way, followed 
(him), and with thoughts that are obstinate and disrespectful…’ (SM 45). This 
phonogram was generally avoided in Shoku Nihongi, because of its semantics, as 
it was used for a female slave. 

This phonogram also appears roughly 44 times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3763 

多婢等伊倍婆 tabi to ipeba It is easy to speak 

許登尓曽夜須伎 koto ni so yasuki about a ‘journey.’ 

須敝毛奈久 subye mo naku There is no better word 

久流思伎多婢毛 kurusiki tabi mo when it is a painful journey 

許等尓麻左米也母 koto ni masame yamo that is beyond one’s control. 

 

彌 


OJ: bi OC: *me 

LH: mie EMC: mjie LMC mbji GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: NA SV: di,ri, nhĩ SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This usage belongs to the CBS. The chart near the end of Jidai betsu kokogu 
daijiten (1967:899) claims that 彌 is used to represent bi (ビ甲), but I have not 
been able to find any obvious examples of this. It is possible, however, that an 
example of 彌 mi is being interpreted as bi. This is the difficulty with the 
orthography in Nihon shoki, as graphs like 弭寐 can represent both mi and bi. A 
correct interpretation is further complicated by a variety of words in Japanese 
that demonstrate mi~bi alternation, such as pebi versus pemi ‘snake.’ 

The single possible example that I can find is in a Shoki poem, third line 
from the end: 

NSK 97 

野須美矢々 yasumisisi And like the sash 

倭我於朋枳美能 wa ga opokimi worn by my great lord 

於魔細屢 obaseru who rules over all 

娑佐羅能美於寐能 sasara no miobi no with its dainty design, 

武須彌陀例 musubitare who is there that 

駄例夜矢比等母 dare yasi pito mo will not come out 

紆陪儞泥堤那皚矩 upe ni dete nageku and lament your parting? 

 

寐 


OJ: bi OC: *mis 

LH: mis EMC: mih LMC mbji GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: mị SV: mị SK: pi 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and its use is found in Nihon shoki, 
once in an annotational note, and 11 times in the poetry: 鮪、此云茲寐 “ ‘Tuna’ 
is read sibi” (NSG). 

NSK 18: 

瀰磨紀異利寐胡播揶 mimakwi iribikwo paya Oh, Mimaki Iribiko! 

飫廼餓烏塢 ono ga wo wo You play with a princess, 

志齊務苔 sisemu to not even knowing that 

農殊末句志羅珥 nusumaku sirazi someone is secretly 

比売那素寐殊望 pimye naswobisu mo planning to take your life. 

 

弭 


OJ: bi OC: *meʔ 

LH: mieʔ EMC: mjieʔ LMC: mbji GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: nhẹ SV: mễ SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and is found in Nihon shoki, in two 
annotational notes: 掌酒、此云佐介弭苔 “ ‘Official in charge of ceremonial 
sake’ is read sakabito” (NSG). Also 睩、此云麻用弭枳 ” ‘Eyebrows’ is read 
maywobiki” (NSG). It also appears in the name of 山部阿弭古 YAMABYE 
Abikwo (NSG). This phonogram also appears eight times in the poetry: 

NSK 40 

阿波旎辭摩 apadisima The isle of Awaji 

異椰敷多那羅弭 iya puta narabi truly lies next to Azuki Island. 

阿豆枳辭摩 adukisima The isle of Azuki 

異椰敷多那羅弭 iya puta narabi truly lies next to Awaji— 

豫呂辭枳辭摩之魔 yoroskiki sima sima such wonderful islands. 

儾伽多佐例阿羅智之 taka tasare aratisi Who is taking my consort? 

吉備那流伊慕塢 kibwi naru imo wo I had just become intimate 

阿比瀰菟流慕能 apimituru mono with that maiden from Kibi. 

 

妣 


OJ: bi OC: *piʔ or *pih 

LH: piʔ, pih EMC: pih LMC: mbji GO: fi KN: bi 

NOM: NA SV: tỉ SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram also belongs to the CBS. This phonogram appears 105 times 
in Man’yōshū, primarily in Books 14, 15, 17, and 20. 

MYS 3636 

伊敝妣等波 ipyebito pa The people of the house pray, 

可敝里波也許等 kapyeri paya ko to ‘Hurry and come back,’ 

伊波比之麻 ipapisima waiting for an auspicious return 

伊波比麻都良牟 ipapimaturamu from Prayer Island— 

多妣由久和礼乎 tabi yuku ware wo for me on my journey. 

 

煩 


OJ: bo OC: *ban 

LH: buan EMC: bjwɐn GO: bomu KN: fan 

NOM: phiền SV: phiền SK: pen 


Usage / History: 

This is the only known phonogram in Kojiki used specifically to represent 
bo. In most cases the polyphonic principal was used in other works where a 
voiceless syllable could represent both a voiceless and prenasalized syllable. 
Note that in Shoki 朋 po functioned in both capacities. The compiler of Kojiki 
went to great lengths to make a distinction, and 煩 is used only as a prenasalized 
syllable. It appears in Kojiki in toponyms like 能煩野 NoboNWO ‘Plain of Nobo’ 
(KG), and in the words of a curse on a hook: 淤煩鉤、須須鉤、貧鉤 oboTI, 
susuTI, MADUTI ‘hook of dullness, hook of recklessness, hook of poverty’ (KG). 

This phonogram also appears seven times in song. 

KK 58 

都藝泥布夜 tuginepu ya How the peaks continue— 

夜麻斯呂賀波袁 yamasirogawa wo sailing up the Yamashiro River 

美夜能煩理 miya nobori to the palace, 

和賀能煩禮婆 wa ga noboreba as I sailed upstream 

阿袁迩余志 awo ni yosi I passed Nara 

那良袁須疑 nara wo sugwi good that it is green. 

袁陀弖 wodate I passed Yamato 

夜麻登袁須疑 yamato wo sugwi like a small shield. 

和賀美賀本斯久迩波 wa ga migapwosi kuni pa The land I desire to see 

迦豆良紀多迦美夜 kadurakwi takamiya is Takamiya in Kazuraki; 

和藝幣能阿多理 wagipye no atari the area around my house. 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, but only once. It is tempting to 
view 煩 as used in Shoki to reflect a voiceless po, based on LMC, but with the 
lenition of an earlier *p to f by the Chang’an period, there had also been a 
simplification of the nucleus: EMC buan > LMC fɦan. I thus see the compiler 
using 煩 for bo, as the following illustrates. 

NSK 19 

飫朋佐介珥 iposaka ni If people were to 

菟藝廼煩例屢 tugi noboreru pass down hand to hand 

伊辭務邏塢 isimura wo all the boulders that 

多誤辭珥固佐縻 tagwosi ni kwosaba make up Mount Ofosaka 

固辭介氐務介茂 kwosikatemu kamo perhaps it could be moved. 

This phonogram appears in Man’yōshū twice to represent bo: 

MYS 3643 

於吉敝欲里 okipye ywori From the vicinity of the offing 

布奈妣等能煩流 punabito noboru the seamen sail capital bound. 

与妣与勢弖 yobiyosete Let us call them over and have 

伊射都氣也良牟 iza tugyeyaramu them relay our message— 

多婢能也登里乎 tabi no yadori wo we are staying here. 

MYS 3724 

君我由久 KIMI ga yuku The long route of the road 

道乃奈我弖乎 MITI no nagate wo that my lord goes down— 

久里多々祢 kuritatane I wish that it could be hauled in, 

也伎保呂煩散牟 yaki porobosamu folded up, and destroyed by fire, 

安米能火毛我母 ame no PWI mogamo the fire of heaven! 


Ōno presents both poems as evidence of bo (3643) and po (3724), but I see 
no reason to interpret either of these as anything but bo. 

 

夫 


OJ: bu OC: *ba or *pa 

LH: buɑ, puɑ EMC: bju, pju GO: bu KN: fu 

NOM: phu SV: phù SK: pwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. As I theorize under 夫 OJ pu, it is 
possible that the peninsular kingdoms used this graph in word initial position as 
pu, but as bu in word medial position. On the Chang-yang hunting stele we find 
examples such as □接夫智 X-tsiap-buɑ-te, or 匝干喙小里夫智 Hyɑs-siauliə 
of the third rank. There are also a number of examples found in the Paekche 
records quoted in Nihon shoki: in the record of Keitai there is a man of Silla 
royalty called 上臣伊叱夫禮智干岐 Minister Isibureti Kanki. This name is 
represented slightly differently in a variant source quoted in Shoki: 伊叱夫禮知 
奈末 Isibureti Nama. At the end of the Keitai record there is an account of the 
armies of Silla and Paekche overthrowing five Kara fortresss, one of which is 
called 阿夫羅 Abura. 

This phonogram also appears in the earliest records in Japan. In Jōgū 
Shōtoku Taishi hōō teisetsu, we find the name of the prince’s wife’s father 
written as 加多夫古 Katabukwo. This phonogram is prevalent on mokkan: 知 
夫利郡由良里 Tiburi District Yura Village (MKK 5:85), 和尓部色夫智 
WaniBYE Sikibuti, or possibly Sikobuti (MK 320). It also appears once in the 
liturgies: 疎夫留物 UTWOburu MONO ‘things that are unfriendly’ (NT 1). 

This is the only phonogram used to transcribe bu in Kojiki: 

KK 50 

知波夜夫流 tipayaburu Endowed with power 

宇遲能和多理迩 udi no watari ni you potent people 

佐袁斗理迩 sawo twori ni who hold the staff 

波夜祁牟比登斯 payakyemu pito si at the ferry of Uji— 

和賀毛古迩許牟 wa ga mwokwo ni komu come to my rescue! 

Perhaps because of its archaic usage, this phonogram only appears somewhat 
rarely in Nihon shoki, appearing twice in the annotational notes, and twice in 
song: 圓此云豆夫羅 “ ‘Circle’ is read tubura” (NSG). 

NSK 29 

伊装阿藝 iza agi My dear friend, 

伊佐智須區禰 isati sikune Isachi Sukune, 

多摩枳波屢 tamakiparu let us not bear deep wounds 

于知能阿曾餓 uti no aso ga from the pommel head sword 

勾夫菟智能 kubututi no of Minister Uchi 

伊多氐於破孺破 itate opazu pa who possesses the strong spirit. 

珥倍廼利能 nipodori no Let us submerge 

介豆岐齋奈 kadukise na like the grebe. 

 This graph also appears once in the Bussoku poems: 

BSS 17 

於保美阿止乎 opoki ato wo Even the sins of 

美尓久留比止乃 minikuru pito no a 1000 generations of the past 


伊尓志加多 inisikata of the person who comes to see 

知与乃都美佐閇 tiyo no tumi sape the great footprints vanish, 

保呂夫止曾伊布 porobu to so ipu so they say. 

乃曾久止叙伎久 nozoku to zo kiku They are removed, we hear! 

The phonogram 夫 is the main graph used to transcribe bu in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 3660 

可牟佐夫流 kamusaburu Like the waves crashing 

安良都能左伎尓 aratu no saki ni at the cape of Aratsu 

与須流奈美 yosuru nami with its archaic, divine aura, 

麻奈久也伊毛尓 manaku ya imwo ni will my yearning for 

故非和多里奈牟. kwopwiwatarinamu my beloved go on unrelenting? 

 

扶 


OJ: bu OC: *ba or *pa 

LH: buɑ, puɑ EMC: bju, pju GO: bu KN: fu 

NOM: phù, phò, vùa SV: phù SK: pwu 

Usage / History: 

This usage belongs to the PBS. The only extant example in Japan is in the 
23rd year of Keitai, where Paekche is labeled 扶余 Puyo. This usage also 
appears in Samkwuk saki, in the 16th year of King Syeng, the record notes that 
the capital was removed to Sopi (泗沘) and the state was called Southern Puyo 
(南扶余). As noted under 夫 OJ pu, I believe that in initial positon this 
represented pu, but in medial position it represented bu. 

This usage also appears three times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 128 

吾聞之 WA GA KIKIsi The things my ears have heard 

耳尓好似 MIMI ni YOKU NIRU well resemble the truth; 

葦若末乃 ASI NO URE no rhyming with the tip of reeds 

足痛吾勢 ASI YAMU WA GE se my brother, with feet distressed, 

勤多扶倍思 TUTOMEtabu besi please take care of yourself. 

 

部 


OJ: bu OC: *bôʔ 

LH: boʔ EMC: bəuʔ GO: bu KN: fo 

NOM: bộ, bõ SV: bộ SK: pwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It is difficult to tease out the distinction 
between the usage as a phonogram and a kungana, as 部 also meant ‘to divide’ 
or ‘a department.’ The following appears on the Silla River stone in Wicwu (ca. 
525 CE): 沙喙部 *sahyɑs-boʔ ‘the second district of the capital’ and 喙部 
*hyɑs-boʔ ‘the first district of the capital.’ What is unclear is how the graph 部 
was pronounced: whether it was a kungana and had a native peninsular reading, 
or if the Old Chinese reading of bo was used. Scholars can glean a hint from 
Nihon shoki, where Silla ranks and titles are quoted: 沙喙部奈末竹世士 ‘Tiku 
Seisi of the 11th rank, from the Sataku District (glossed satakuhou)...’ and 喙部 
大舍首智買 ‘Su Tibai of the twelfth rank from the Taku District (glossed 
takuhou).’ Here both graphs are glossed as hou (ホウ). It is possible that vowelraising 
in one branch of a donor language while another language kept the vowel 


at the original height explains the discrepancy between bu and bo. These 
examples suggest that the graph was used as a phonogram. 

Other evidence can also be found from Paekche records quoted in Nihon 
shoki. There is a Paekche name 百濟人己知部 ‘Kotibu, a man from Paekche.’ 

Perhaps because of its semantics this graph was avoided in most of the early 
Japanese texts. In Nihon shoki it appears but once in an annotational note: 傾子、 
此云柯陁部古 ‘The name Katabuko is read katabukwo’ (NSG). 

Ōno (1977:601–602) fails to mention that 部 appears in the orthography of 
Man’yōshū, but Jidai betsu notes there is at least one example (1967:899). It is 
true that the graph 部 appears an almost innumerable times in the anthology, but 
in most cases these transcribe pye. It is possible that Jidai betsu has reference to 
the stanza in the following poem: 

MYS 264 

物乃部能 MONOnopu no It is unclear where the 

八十氏河乃 YASWOUDI KAPA no water that hesitates at the weirs 

阿白木尓 aZIRWOKWI ni of the Uji River— 

不知代經浪乃 ISAYWOPU NAMI no of the eighty warrior uji— 

去邊白不母 YUKUpye SIRAZU mo intends to go. 

It is doubtful, however, that 部 in this song could be considered as bu, since 
mononopu is a set epithet. Another tenuous possibility is in the following 
somewhat cryptic song: 

MYS 3791: 

丹穂々為衣丹 NIPOPOSI KINU NI On to the brightly dyed robe 

狛錦 KWOMA NISIKI I sew a cord of Koryo brocade, 

紐丹縫著 PIMWO NI NUPITUKE tied repeatedly around me, 

刺部重部 sibu KASANEpu filled with feelings of longing; 

波累服 NAMI KASANE KWITE I wear this robe over my other robes.... 

The stanza 刺部重部 has been tentatively interpreted as represneting sibu 
kasanepu. I have interpreted 刺 ‘stick through’ as a phonogram si with 部 as 
bu. This produces a noun sibu ‘astringent, sour,’ interpreted as a feeling of 
longing, and kasanepu is the interative, continuing to layer. This produces a 
visual feeling of the string being wound around several times and tied, while the 
underlying reading is one of complex feelings of longing. Again, however, this is 
nothing more than conjecture. 

 

父 


OJ: bu OC: *baʔ or *paʔ 

LH: buɑʔ, puɑʔ EMC: bjuʔ, pjuʔ LMC: fɦu GO: bu KN: fu 

NOM: phụ SV: phụ SK: pwo, pwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in Nihon shoki, in one 
annotational note and one song, both from Book 24: 乳部此云美父 ‘Wet nurses 
are called mibu” (NSG). 

NSK 109 

波魯々々儞 parwo parwo ni Far off in the distance 

渠騰曾枳擧喩屢 koto so kikoyuru you can hear someone speaking 

之麻能野父播羅 sima no yabupara in the thicket on the island plain. 


This phonogram also appears once in Man’yōshū, in the place name 秩父郡 
‘District of Titibu’ (MYS 4414). 

 

府 


OJ: bu OC: *poʔ 

LH: puoʔ EMC: pjuʔ GO: fu KN: fu 

NOM: phủ SV: phủ SK: pwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and while there is only one case that I 
can find of this phonogram representing OJ bu (which makes it tempting to argue 
that this is actually OJ pu), I place it here. This graph appears often in Man’yōshū, 
but the majority of cases are related to the Dazaifu (大宰府). The following 
example is the only case of 府 used as a phonogram in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 1798 

古家丹 INISIPYE NI Looking at Black Oxen Bay 

妹等吾見 IMWO to WA GA MISI dark as jewels 

黒玉之 NUBATAMA NO which my beloved and I had 

久漏牛方乎 kurwo USIGATA wo gazed at long ago 

見佐府下 MIREBA sabuSI MO I feel forsaken. 

 

歩 


OJ: bu OC: *bâh 

LH: bɑh EMC: buoh LMC: pɦuə GO: bu KN: fo 

NOM: bộ SV: bộ, bò SK: pwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and its usage only appears in Nihon 
shoki. It appears once in the following annotational note: 頭槌、此云箇歩豆智 
“Pommel head (sword) is read kabututi” (NSG). 

It also appears in two poems (NSK 59, 60) to write the name of Prince 
Hayabusa Wake: 破夜歩佐（和気）payabusa wake. This is an example of an 
earlier usage. 

 

矛 


OJ: bu OC: *mu 

LH: mu EMC: məu LMC: mbuw GO: mu KN: bu 

NOM: mâu SV: mâu SK: mwu, mwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and is only found in Nihon shoki, and 
then only once: 頗傾也、此云歌矛志 “ ‘Let one’s head hang down’ is read 
kabusi” (NSG). 

 

符 


OJ: bu OC: *bo 

LH: buo EMC: bju LMC: fɦuə GO: bu KN: fu 

NOM: phù, bùa SV: phù SK: pwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, but there is only one known example of 
this to transcribe bu, appearing in the following song: 

NSK 75 

倭我伊麻西麼 wa ga imaseba As I sit here 

佐謂麻都登 sawi matu to waiting for the boar, 


倭我陀々西麼 wa ga tataseba as I rise to my feet 

陀倶符羅爾 takubura ni a horsefly lands 

阿武柯枳都枳 amu kakituki on my arm and bites me. 

Some have argued that 陀倶符羅 should be read takupura, but considering 
that the related song in Kojiki has 多古牟羅 takwomura, and we know that there 
are a variety of words in OJ that exhibit b ~ m alternation, it seems more 
persuasive to argue that 符 here transcribes bu. As the CBS reading would force 
pu, it appears that the scribe has simply relied on the EMC reading. 

 

鶩 


OJ: bu OC: *moh 

LH: muoh EMC: mjuh LMC mbuw GO: mu KN: bu 

NOM: NA SV: vụ, vu SK: mwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, appearing in one song in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 9 

於佐箇廼 osaka no Though there are many 

於朋務露夜珥 opomurwoya ni who have come and entered 

比苔瑳破而 pito sapa ni the great cavern of Osaka, 

異離烏利苔毛 iriwori tomo and though many men 

比苔瑳破而 pito sapa ni have entered here 

枳伊離烏利苔毛 ki iriwori tomo and are seated before us, 

瀰都瀰都志 mitumitusi you, the intrepid 

倶梅能固邏餓 kume no kwora ga sons of the Kume, 

勾鶩都々伊 kubututui with pommel-head hilts, 

異志都々伊毛智 isitutui moti holding your stone-head swords, 

于智弖之夜莽務 utitesi yamamu will now smite the enemy. 

 

蜂音 



OJ: bu OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: NA GO: NA KN: NA 

NOM: NA SV: NA SK: NA 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, ‘bee-sound,’ suggesting to the reader the sound made by a 
bee, akin to English buzz, but OJ bu. This usage appears only once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2991 

眉隠 MAYWOGOMORI hiding in their cocoons, 

馬聲蜂音石花蜘蟵荒鹿 IBUSEKU MO ARU KA I am surrounded by gloom, 

異母二不相而 imo ni APAZUSITE because I cannot see you. 

 

備 



OJ: bwi OC: *brəkh 

LH: bɨəh > bɨh EMC: bjɨh GO: bi KN: fi 

NOM: bị, vựa SV: bị SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The earliest datable instance of this 
phonogrammatic usage is in the Chikuzen census of 702 CE, in the name 吉備 
Kibwi, though it is clear this toponym can be dated much earlier. All examples of 
the transcription of this toponym are either 吉備 or 岐備, but the final graph 
does not change. This is also true of many usages on mokkan. This phonogram 


appears in the liturgies six times: 四角与利疎備荒備来武天能麻我都比登云神 
YOSUMI yori UTWObwi ARAbwi KITARAmu AME no magatubi to IPU KAMWI ‘the 
deity known as Ame no Magatsubi who is unfriendly and violent who comes 
from the four corners…’ (NT 9). 

This phonogram is also used to transcribe bwi in non-toponymic usages in 
Kojiki: 宇摩志阿斯訶備比古遲神 Umasi Asikabwi Pikwozi [NO] KAMWI ‘The 
deity Umashi Ashikabi Hikoji’ (KG); 和備弖 wabwite ‘be puzzled’ (KG). It 
also appears in the following song in Kojiki: 

KK 78 

阿志比紀能 asipikwi no Weary from climbing 

夜麻陀袁豆久理 yamada wo tukuri I cultivated mountain land. 

夜麻陀加美 yamadakami The mountain being high 

斯多備袁和志勢 sitabwi wo wasise I buried irrigation pipes. 

志多杼比爾 sitadopi ni Secretly I visited my wife. 

和賀登布伊毛袁 wa ga topu imwo wo My beloved who I visited— 

斯多那岐爾 sitanaki ni thus I cry to myself. 

和賀那久都麻袁 wa ga naku tuma wo I weep for my spouse. 

許存許曾波 kozo koso pa It was last night 

夜須久波陀布禮 yasuku pada pure that our flesh calmly touched. 

This phonogram also is used in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 105 

于泥備椰摩 unebwi yama Though the trees 

虚多智于須家苔 kotati usukyedo are sparse on Mount Unebi, 

多能彌介茂 tanomi kamo is it the young Ketsu 

氣菟能和區呉能 ketu no wakugwo no who has hidden himself there 

虚茂羅勢利祁牟 komoraserikyemu hoping for support? 

This phonogram is the primary graph in Man’yōshū to represent bwi. 

MYS 33 

樂浪乃 SASANAMI no The august deity of 

國都美神乃 KUNItu miKAMWI no the land of Sasanami 

浦佐備而 URAsabwiTE has become unimportant. 

荒有京 ARETARU MIYAKWO Looking upon the desolate 

見者悲毛 MIREBA KANASI mo metropolis breaks my heart. 

 

肥 


OJ: bwi OC: *bəi 

LH: bui EMC: bjwei GO: bi KN: fi 

NOM: phì, phề, phè SV: phì SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

See the explanation under pwi for this character. 

 

媚 


OJ: bwi OC: *muih 

LH: mɨh EMC: mji LMC: mbi GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: mị SV: mị SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears in a Nihon shoki song. 


NSK 69 

阿資臂紀能 asipikwi no Weary from climbing 

椰摩娜烏菟勾利 yamada wo tukuri I cultivated mountain land. 

椰摩娜箇彌 yamadakami The mountain being high, 

斯哆媚烏和之勢 sitabwi wo wasise I buried irrigation pipes. 

 

眉 


OJ: bwi OC: *mui or *məiʔ 

LH: mɨ, muiʔ EMC: mji, mjweiʔ LMC: mbi GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: mì, mày SV: mi SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and is found only once in Nihon shoki, 
in an annotational note: 雄誥、此云嗚多稽眉 “ ‘Ferocity’ is read wotakyebwi” 
(NSG). 

 

縻 


OJ: bwi OC: *mai 

LH: mɨe EMC: mje LMC: mbiə GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: NA SV: mi SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram also belongs to the CBS. This phonogram appears twice in 
the annotational notes in Nihon shoki: 雄誥、此云烏多鷄縻 “ ‘shout bravely’ 
is read takyebwi” (NSG), 畝傍山、此云宇禰縻夜摩 “ ‘Mount Unebi’ is read 
unebwi yama” (NSG). 

 

婢 


OJ: bye OC: *beʔ 

LH: bieʔ EMC: bjieʔ GO: bi KN: fi 

NOM: tì SV: tì SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram is the oldest known graph used specifically to transcribe OJ 
bye, but it only appears in an early Nara era document, so I place this graph in the 
LJS. It appears in the Buzen Census of 702, in the name 伊婢賣 Ibyemye. It 
also appears in Kujiki, in 淡海國谷上刀婢 TAGAMI Twobye of APUMI. 

 

謎 


OJ: bye OC: *mîh 

LH: meih EMC: mieih LMC: mbɛj GO: mei KN: bei 

NOM: mê SV: mê SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears only in Nihon shoki, once in 
an annotational note, and once in a song: 小甂、此云鳥儺謎 “ ‘(The name) 
Onabe’ is read wonabye” (NSG). 

NSK 79 

耶麼能謎能 yamanobye no I have no regrets 

故思麼古喩衞爾 kwosimakwo yuwe ni parting with my prized 

比登涅羅賦 pito derapu eight horses we show off— 

宇麼能耶都擬播 uma no yatugwi pa all because of the woman, 

嗚思稽矩謀那斯 wosikyeku mo nasi Yamanobe Koshimako. 

There seems to be some confusion, where Ōno (1977:792) lists 謎 as both 
bye and be. The editors of Jidai betsu kokugo daijiten (1967:900) appear to have 


made the same decision, but based on what criteria is unclear to me. In order to 
unravel this mystery I list all examples of this phonogram found in the first half 
of Nihon shoki: 

i) 天探女、此云阿麻能左愚謎 Ama no Sagumye (name) 

ii) 避奈菟謎廼 pinatumye ‘provincial maidens’ 

iii) 欝色謎 UTU Sikomye (name) 

iv) 伊香色謎命 IKAsikomye [NO] MIKOTO (name) 

v) 小甂、此云鳥儺謎 ‘Onabe’ is read wonabye 

vi) 以破能臂謎餓 ipa no pimye ga ‘Prince Iwa…’ 

vii) 揶摩之呂謎能 yamasiromye no ‘the maiden of Yamashiro…’ 

viii) 夜莽之呂謎能 yamasiromye no ‘the maiden of Yamashiro…’ 

ix) 謎廼利餓 myetori ga ‘the female bird’ 

x) 阿布夜烏等謎烏 apu ya wotomye wo ‘the maiden I met…’ 

xi) 耶麼能謎能 yamanobye no ‘of Yamanobe’ 

xii) 偉儺謎能 winabye no ‘of Inabe’ 

xiii) 鯽魚女、此云浮儺謎 punamye Funame (name) 

xiv) 哭女、此云儺倶謎 nakumye Nakume (name) 

Thus, there are no examples of this phonogram used to represent be. This 
phonogram was mainly used to represent mye, as 11 of the 14 examples attest. 
The only clue we have that 謎 is to be read bye in (xi) is that the preface to this 
poem has the name 山邊小島子 YAMAbye KWOSIMAKWO. Likewise, (xii) is 
prefaced with the name 韋那部眞根 WinaBYE MANE. 

 

部 


OJ: bye OC: *bôʔ 

LH: boʔ EMC: bəuʔ GO: bu KN: fo 

NOM: bộ, bõ SV: bộ SK: pwu 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind what appears to be a peninsular 
distinction made according a military standard, which may have been later 
introduced to Japan and became a designation for industrial groups employed by 
powerful scions. Thus, the reader thinks of OJ pye. Ōno (1977:25) proclaims that 
there is little evidence that this was bye, so he sees it as transcribing pye. The 
received tradition reads it bye, so I have followed that tradition. 

While examples in the early texts use 部 almost exclusively for names of 
groups, Man’yōshū contains a few examples that are more interesting. 

MYS 258 

潜為 KADUKI SURU Those diving birds, 

鴦与高部共 WOSI TO TAKABYE TO the mandarin duck and teal, 

船上住 PUNE NO UPE NI SUMU are living on the boats. 

 

 

 


D 

 

 

大 



OJ: da OC: *dâs 

LH: dɑh, das EMC: dâih GO: dai KN: tai 

NOM: đại SV: đại, thái SK: ta, tay, thay 

Usage / History: 

See the same character under the heading of ta. 

 

太 


OJ: da OC: *thâs 

LH: thɑs EMC: thâih GO: tai KN: tai 

NOM: thái SV: thái SK: thay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. For an explanation of the problems with 
distinguishing between 大 and 太 see the explanation under 大 OJ: ta. This 
phonogram is prevalent in writings on mokkan, but often it is a logogram to 
represent PUTO or OPO. Examples where it is a phonogram include: 間人宿祢斐 
太万呂 PASIPITO Sukune Pwidamaro (unnumbered tablet). This phonogram 
appears four times in the liturgies: 許許太久乃罪乎 kokodaku no TUMI wo 
‘(We establish as heavenly sins) these many sins…’ (NT 10). 

The graph 太 is seen twice in Kojiki: 阿太之別 ada [NO] WAKE (KG), and 
品太天皇 pomuda [NO] SUMYERA [NO] MIKOTO (KG). This graph is also used 
twice in the poetry of Nihon shoki. 

NSK 46 

于磨臂苔能 umapito no I tell you plainly, 

多菟屢虚等太氐 taturu kotodate with a nobleman’s promise— 

于磋由豆流 usayuduru she is only 

多曳麼菟餓務珥 tayema tugamu ni a spare bowstring for the time 

奈羅陪氐毛餓望 narabete mo ga mo when the one I have breaks. 

This phonogram also appears in the Bussoku stele poems four times. 

BSS 2 

弥蘇知阿麻利 miswoti amari The person who is complete 

布多都乃加多知 putatu no katati with the thirty-two marks 

夜蘇久佐等 yaswokusa to and the eighty types of merits 

曾太礼留比止乃 sodareru pito no at the place where the footprints 

布美志阿止々己呂 pumisi ato tokoro have been trod— 

麻礼尓母阿留可毛 mare nimo aru kamo how rare these are! 

In Man’yōshū 太 is the main graph used to transcribe da: 伊久太母 ikuda 
mo (MYS 804) “no matter how much...”; 多太爾 tada ni (MYS 809) 
“directly”; 己太知 kodati (MYS 867) “clump of trees.” 

MYS 2732 

奥波 OKITUNAMI At the bay of Sada where 

邊浪之来縁 pyeNAMI NO KIYORU the waves of the offing 

左太能浦之 sada no URA NO and waves of the shore crash— 


此左太過而 KONO sada SUGWITE if this opportunity passes 

後将戀可聞 NOTI KWOPWIkamo will I long for you afterward? 

The cursive form of 太 became hiragana た. 

 

陁 


OJ: da OC: draiʔ 

LH: ḍiaiʔ EMC: ḍjeʔ GO: da KN: ta 

NOM: đà SV: đà SK: tha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. There appears to be some textual 
confusion between 陁 and 陀, but I have grouped all examples here under 陁. 
This usage appears once in the Jōgūki fragment, in a rather rare annotational 
note: 養育 比陁斯奉之云 where the graphs 養育 ‘to raise’ are read pidasi. 
This phonogram appears on a variety of excavated wooden tablets, many times to 
represent the chant 南無阿弥陀仏 namu amida butu (MKK 3:54, MKK 15:14). 

This phonogram also appears in Kojiki, and is the main graph used to 
represent da: 淤母陁流神 the deity Omodaru (KG), and 葦那陀迦神 the deity 
ASInadaka (KG). 

KK 111 

阿佐遲波良 asadipara Over the fields of sparse reeds 

袁陁爾袁須疑弖 wodani wo sugwite and over the knolls 

毛毛豆多布 mwomwodutapu how the ring of the bell 

奴弖由良久母 nute yurakumo sounds far off— 

於岐米久良斯母 okime kurasi mo it seems that Okime has come. 

As noted under ta this phonogram is primarily used to represent ta, but there 
are several examples of this phonogram used for da in Nihon shoki, attesting to 
the various ages of information included in the work: 徳陁 Tokuda (NG), 徳陁 
古 Tokudakwo (NG), and 阿彌陁 amida (NG). 

This is one of the primary graphs used in Man’yōshū to transcribe da. 

MYS 191 

毛許呂裳遠 KEkoroMO wo When it is time for hunting 

春冬片設而 TOKI KATAMAKETE and we wear our down robes, 

幸之 IDEMASIsi on the great plain of Uda 

宇陁乃大野者 uda no OPONWO PA where we have gone out 

所念武鴨 OMOPOYEmu KAMO I will likely be reminded of you. 

 

騨 


OJ: da OC: *dâi or dân 

LH: dɑi or dan EMC: dâ or dân GO: da, dan KN: ta, tan 

NOM: NA SV: NA SK: tha, than 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This graph appears in the various Taihō 
and Yōrō censuses to write the place name Hida 飛騨 pida. This same usage for 
Hida also appears in Nihon shoki and Shoku Nihongi. 

 

娜 


OJ: da OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: na LMC: nda GO: na KN: da 

NOM: na, nạ SV: nã SK: na 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This graph is used three times in the 
annotational notes, and 13 times in the poetry in Nihon shoki: 裸伴、此云阿箇 
播娜我等母 ‘sword with no sheath’ is read akapadaga tomo” (NG), 葉田此云 
簸娜 “ ‘(The place name) leaf-field’ is read pada” (NG). 

NSK 120 

瀰儺度能 minatwo no Sailing down the river 

于之裒能矩娜利 usipo no kudari to the harbor, 

于那倶娜梨 una kudari riding out to sea my mind 

于之廬母倶例尼 usiro mo kure ni darkens even with the past— 

飫岐底舸庾舸武 okite ka yukamu must I leave you and sail on? 

 

嚢 


OJ: da OC: *nâŋ 

LH: nɑŋ EMC: nâŋ LMC: ndaŋ GO: nau KN: dau 

NOM: nang SV: nang SK: nang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It is only used once in Nihon shoki, in 
the following poem: 

NSK 97 

莒母唎矩能 kumoriku no In the hidden land, 

簸覩細能哿波庚 patuse no kapa yu the bamboo flowing down 

那峨礼倶屢 nagarekuru the Hatsuse River— 

駄開能 take no wonderful, flourishing bamboo 

以矩美娜開余嚢開 ikumidake yodake with long joints and leaves. 

 

儾 


OJ: da OC: *nâŋ 

LH: nɑŋ EMC: nâŋh LMC: ndâŋh GO: nau KN: dau 

NOM: NA SV: náng SK: nang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears 14 times in the poetry of 
Nihon shoki: 

NSK 7 

于儾能 uda no In the high 

多伽機珥 takakwi ni fort of Uda 

辭藝和奈破蘆 sigi wana paru a trap for snipe I set, 

和餓末菟夜 wa ga matu ya and as I waited— 

辭藝破佐夜羅孺 sigi pa sayarazu it did not catch a snipe. 

伊殊區波辭 isukupasi What it did capture 

區旎羅佐夜離 kudira sayari were two intrepid hawks. 

固奈瀰餓 kwonami ga If your first wife 

那居波佐麼 na kopasaba asks for a side dish, 

多智曾麼能 tatisoba no cut her slices of meat 

未廼那鷄句塢 mwi no nakyeku wo with almost no flesh— 

居氣辭被惠禰 kokwisipwiwene barren, like the hawthorn. 

宇破奈利餓 upanari ga If your favorite wife 

那居波佐麼 na kopasaba asks for a side dish, 

伊智佐介幾 iti sakakwi cut her many slices of meat 


未廼於朋鷄句塢 mwi no opokyeku wo like the hisakaki fruit— 

居氣儾被惠禰 kokwidapwiwene blessed in abundance. 

 

談 


OJ: dami OC: *lâm 

LH: dam EMC: dâm GO: dan KN: tan 

NOM: đàm SV: đàm SK: tam 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears once in Izumo fudoki in the 
name 美談 Midami. 

 

弾 


OJ: dani OC: *dân 

LH: dan EMC: dân GO: damu KN: tan 

NOM: đàn, đạn, rờn SV: đàn SK: than 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3119 

従明日者 ASU YORI PA I will go on my journey 

戀乍将去 KWOPWI TUTU YUKAMU tomorrow while I yearn for you. 

今夕弾 KOYOPI dani Even if only tonight 

速初夜従 PAYAKU YOPI YORI hurry and untie your cord 

綏解我妹 PIMWO TOKE WAGIMWO before dawn, my beloved. 

 

傳 


OJ: de OC: *dron 

LH: ḍyan EMC: ḍjwän GO: demu KN: ten 

NOM: truyền, chuyện SV: truyền, truyện SK: cyen 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the EJS, and appears only in Kojiki: 比羅傳 pirade 
‘flat plate’ (KG), and 訶那傳 kanade ‘dancing with hand movements’ (KG). 

KK 105 

意富美夜能 opomiya no The edge over there 

袁登都波多傳 wototu patade of the great palace 

須美加多夫祁理 sumi katabukyeri is tilting to one side. 

 

殿 


OJ: de OC: *təns 

LH: denh EMC: dienh GO: demu KN: ten 

NOM: điện, đền,Çiếng SV: điện, điên, điến, SK: tyen 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the EJS. It appears once in Kojiki, in a note: 訓垂云志 
殿 “The reading for ‘hang down’ is side” (KG). 

 

代 


OJ: de OC: *lə̂ kh 

LH: dəh EMC: dậih GO: dai KN: tai 

NOM: đại, đời SV: đại SK: toy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. One of the oldest datable examples 
appears in the Chikuzen Census of 702: 宇代賣 Udemye, 蘇代賣 Swodemye, 
and 刀良代賣 Tworademye. As the graph 代 was also popular as a kungana 


for siro, the interpretation of these names is of some debate, however, 蘇代賣 
likely means ‘woman of the sleeves’ (cf. Ōno 1962:590). There is one example 
of this in Shoku Nihongi: 財部宇代 TAKARABYE Ude (770.7.18). 

This phonogram also appears a number of times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 228 

妹之名者 IMWO GA NA PA The name of the maiden 

千代尓将流 TIYO ni NAGAREMU will extend for a 1000 reigns; 

姫嶋之 PIMYESIMA NO until treemoss grows down 

子松之末尓 KWOMATU GA URE ni from the tops of the young 

蘿生萬代尓 KOKE MUSU made ni pine trees on Hime Island. 

 

堤 


OJ: de OC: *dê 

LH: de EMC: diei LMC: tiaj GO: tai KN: tei 

NOM: đê SV: đê, đề SK: tyey 

Usage / History: 

See the same phonogram under te. 

 

提 


OJ: de OC: *têʔ or dê 

LH: teh, de EMC: tieih, diei GO: dai KN: tei 

NOM: đê, đề, chề SV: đề, thì SK: tyey 

Usage / History: 

See the same phonogram under te. 

 

低 


OJ: de OC: *tî 

LH: tei EMC: tiei GO: tai KN: tei 

NOM: đê SV: đê SK: tye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. There is also the phonogram 凰, but I 
adhere to the view that this is a variant of 低. This phonogram appears in 
Man’yōshū roughly 24 times. 

MYS 3704 

毛美知婆能 mwomitiba no I came outside, 

知良布山邊由 tirapu YAMAbye yu drawn by the beautiful red hue 

許具布祢能 kogu pune no of the boat rowing from around 

尓保比尓米低低 nipopi ni medete the edge of the mountain where 

伊低低伎尓家里 idete kinikyeri the autumn leaves are scattering. 

 

田 


OJ: de OC: *lîn 

LH: den EMC: dien GO: demu KN: ten 

NOM: điền, ruộng SV: điền SK: tyen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only in Man’yōshū. I have 
found five examples. 

MYS 4330 

奈尓波都尓 nanipatu ni At the port of Naniwa 

余曽比余曽比弖 yosopi yosopite I readied the ship for days— 

氣布能比夜 kepu no pi ya is today the day I depart 


伊田弖麻可良武 idete makaramu for my mission without 

美流波々奈之尓 miru papa nasi ni Mother coming to see me off? 

There is also a poem in Man’yōshū where the final nasal of the Chinese 
reading of the character 田 appears to be used to introduce the nasal-initial of 
the next word: 

MYS 2400 

伊田何 ide NANIKA Why do I long for you 

極太甚 kokoda PANAPADA so incredibly intensely 

利心 TWOGOKORO NO that I almost lose my mind? 

及失念 USURU MADE OMOPU Surely it is 

戀故 KWOPWI YUWE NI KOSO due to love. 

 

弟 


OJ: de OC: *dîʔ 

LH: deiʔ EMC: dieiʔ LMC: tɦiaj GO: dai KN: tei 

NOM: đệ SV: đệ, đễ SK: tyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, though it only appears in Nihon shoki. It 
appears once in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 

NSK 16 

宇磨佐開 umasake What sweet sake! 

瀰和能等能々 miwa no tono no How we wish to return 

阿佐妬珥毛 asatwo nimo to our homes this morning, 

伊弟氐由介那 idete yukana going through the gate 

瀰和能等能渡塢 miwa no tono two wo of this, the Miwa Shrine. 

 

泥 


OJ: de OC: *nî 

LH: nei EMC: niei LMC: ndiaj GO: nai KN: dei 

NOM: nệ, nè, nể, nề SV: nê, nệ SK: ni 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears seven times in the poetry in 
Nihon shoki. 

NSK 108 

武舸都烏爾 mukatuwo ni On the peak over there 

陀底屢制囉我 tateru sera ga that person standing 

儞古泥擧曾 nikwode koso with soft hands— 

倭我底烏騰羅毎 wa ga te wo torame he should take my hand. 

拕我佐基泥 ta ga sakwide These dry, cracked hands, 

作基泥曾母野 sakwide so moya who would take my hand 

倭我底騰羅須謀野 wa ga te torasu mo ya in his own hands? 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, appearing roughly 53 times, 
with all examples in the last four books of the work, aside from two usages in 
one poem in Book 6. 

MYS 1031 

後尓之 OKUREnisi Thoughts yearning for 

人乎思久 PITO wo SINWOPAku the people left behind— 

四泥能埼 side no SAKI at the Cape of Shide I hang 


木綿取之泥而 YUPU TORI sideTE a mulberry paper offering 

好住跡其念 SAKIKU TO SO OMOPU praying for their safety. 

Interestingly, the poet makes a visual connection with side, the name of a 
cape, and side, the infinitive of the verb sidu ‘to hang an offering.’ 

 

埿 


OJ: de OC: *nî 

LH: nei EMC: niei LMC: ndiaj GO: nai KN: dei 

NOM: nệ, nè, nể, nề SV: nê, nệ SK: ni 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This is a very rare usage, appearing in 
Nihon shoki only once in the annotational notes. It is also used once to represent 
ne (which see). 隈、此云矩磨埿 “ ‘corner’ is read kumade” (NSG). The editors 
of the NKBT text have this as 矩磨泥 kumade (Ienaga et al. 1986.1:141), but 
the editors of the Shōgakkan edition (Kojima et al. 2002, 1:118) have 矩磨埿, 
which I have followed. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, appearing 21 times, but all 
confined to Book 20. 

MYS 4302 

夜麻夫伎波 yamabuki pa Let us nurture 

奈埿都々於保佐牟 nadetutu oposamu the yellow rose with care. 

安里都々母 aritutu mo You have decorated 

伎美伎麻之都々 kimi kimasitutu your hair with a flower 

可射之多里家利 kazasitarikyeri as you continue unabated. 

 

涅 


OJ: de OC: *nît 

LH: net EMC: niet LMC ndiat GO: neti KN: detu 

NOM: nát, nít, nét SV: nát, niết SK: nal, nyel 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears eight times in the poetry of 
Nihon shoki: 

NSK 43 

智破揶臂等 tipayabito Very powerful, 

于旎能和多利珥 udi no watari ni those catalpa trees 

和多利涅珥 wataride ni standing by the bank 

多氐屢 tateru of the ferry. 

阿豆瑳由瀰摩由瀰 adusa yumi mayumi To make a true catalpa bow, 

伊枳羅牟苔 ikiramu to I thought in my heart 

虚々呂破望閉耐 kokoro pa mopedo to cut down a catalpa tree. 

伊斗羅牟苔 itworamu to I thought in my heart 

虚々呂破望閉耐 kokoro pa mopedo to hold one of those trees. 

望苔弊破 motopye pa I thought of you 

枳瀰烏於望臂涅 kimi wo omopide at the trunk of the tree. 

須慧弊破 suwepye pa I remembered you 

伊暮烏於望比涅 imwo wo omopide when I looked up at the crown. 

伊羅那鷄區 iranakyeku I felt such sorrow 

曾虚珥於望比 soko ni omopi thinking about you there. 


伽那志鷄區 kanasikyeku I felt such sadness 

虚々珥於望臂 koko ni omopi thinking about you here. 

伊枳羅儒層區屢 ikirazu so kuru I left with out cutting down 

阿豆瑳由瀰摩由瀰 adusa yumi mayumi the tree for the true catalpa bow. 

 

耐 


OJ: de OC: *nə̂ h 

LH: nəh EMC: nậih LMC: ndəj GO: nai, nou KN: tai, tou 

NOM: nài, nại SV: nại SK: nay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears only twice in annotational 
notes in Nihon shoki: 葉盤此云毘羅耐 “ ‘Flat plate’ this is read pirade” (NSG), 
可美真手此云于魔詩莽耐 “ ‘Umasimade’ this is read umasimade” (NSG). The 
phonogram 耐 is also used to represent do (which see). 

 

遲 


OJ: di OC: *drih 

LH: ḍih EMC: ḍi GO: di KN: ti 

NOM: chầy, trì SV: chì, trì SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. Several peninsular names are written 
with this graph in Nihon shoki: 佐利遲 Saridi, and 久遲布礼 Kudipure. The 
first name is the name of the King of Silla, known as 原宗 (EMC ŋjwɐn-tsuoŋ, 
Korean wen-cwong). There is speculation that sari is simply a Silla reading of 
原 ‘field,’ but I would rather view this as related to MK cal ‘properly, correctly.’ 
Scholars also speculate that Kudipure is a variant form of the name 居柒夫 kɨətshit-
buə, who was a high-ranking official at court. It is quite possible that these 
two representations refer to the same person. The key here is that the Shoki 
editors relied on Paekche records for the transcription, meaning that the usages 
are Paekche versions of the Silla names. 

This phonogram appears once in the liturgies: 屋船久久遅命 (是木霊也 
“YAPUNE Kukudi [NO] MIKOTO (this is the spirit of the trees)…” (NT 8). 

This phonogram appears on several mokkan: 宇遅部 UdiBYE (MK 1308), 
阿遅一斗二升 “one PAKWO and two MASU (about eight bushels) of adi ‘saurel 
fish’…” (MK 1650), 久遅良 kudira (MK 3015), which is either a name or the 
word for whale. 

This phonogram also appears in the Suiko era corpus: 布遲波良己等布斯郎 
女 Pudipara Kotopusi IRATUMYE. This phonogram appears in a very old poem 
preserved in Jōgū shōtoku hōō tesisetsu: 

美加弥乎須 mikami wosu Mount Tabasami 

多婆佐美夜麻乃 tabasami yama no that rules from above; 

阿遲加気尓 adikake ni alas, I stood there 

比止乃麻乎之志 pito no mawosisi in the shade of the aji, 

和何於保支美波母 wa ga opokimi pamo begging our master’s return. 

This phonogram 遲 is the standard graph in Kojiki to represent di: 宇麻志 
阿斯訶備比古遲神 ‘the deity Umasi Asikabwi Pikwodi’ (KG), 大穴牟遲神 
OPOANAmudi KAMWI ‘the deity Ōanamuji’ (KG), 宇摩志麻遲命 Umasimadi 
(KG), and 品遲部 PomudiBYE (KG). 


KK 50 

知波夜夫流 tipayaburu Endowed with power 

宇遲能和多理迩 udi no watari ni you potent people 

佐袁斗理迩 sawo twori ni who hold the staff 

波夜祁牟比登斯 payakyemu pito si at the ferry of Uji— 

和賀毛古迩許牟 wa ga mwokwo ni komu come to my rescue! 

There are only a few examples of 遲 in Nihon shoki: 品遲 Pomudi (NSG), 
多遲 Tadi (NGS), 多遲比 Tadipi (NGS). 

This phonogram is used sparingly in Man’yōshū, appearing 12 times: 

MYS 801 

比佐迦多能 pisakata no Far off and distant 

阿麻遲波等保斯 amadi pa toposi the road to heaven is remote. 

奈保々々尓 napo napo ni So obediently 

伊弊尓可弊利提 ipye ni kapyerite return home 

奈利乎斯麻佐尓 nari wo simasa ni and do your work. 

This phonogram also appears once in a poem from the Footprints of the 
Buddha sequence. 

BSS 13 

乎遲奈伎夜 wodinaki ya There are so many people 

和礼尓於止礼留 ware ni otoreru who are weaker than I! 

比止乎於保美 pito wo opomi To ferry them across the gulf, 

和多佐牟多米止 watasamu tame to I have respectfully 

宇都志麻都礼利 utusimatureri copied down these things. 

都加閇麻都礼利 tukapematureri I have respectfully served. 

 

治 


OJ: di OC: *drə(h) 

LH: ḍiə(h) EMC: ḍɨ(h) GO: di KN: ti 

NOM: chệ, trị SV: trì, trị SK: chi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The earliest datable example of this 
usage appears in the Taihō census (702): 多治麻賣 Tadimamye, and 宇治部 
UdiBYE. 

This graph is used in Kojiki and Nihon shoki: 阿治志貴高日子根神 the 
deity Adisikwi TAKAPIKWONE (KG), 丹波能阿治佐波毘賣 Tanipa no 
Adisapabimye (KG), 多治比之柴垣宮 The Tadipi SIBAGAKI Palace (KG), and 
多治比君 Tadipi KIMI (KG), 品治 Pomudi (NSG), 邑治 MURAdi (NSG). 
Names like 宇治 Udi (700.3.10) and 品治部 公 嶋 麻 呂 PumudiBYE 
KIMISIMA Maro (767.1.8) appear in Shoku Nihongi. 

The phonogram 治 is the main graph used to transcribe di in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 3611 

於保夫祢尓 opobune ni In the great ship 

麻可治之自奴伎 makadi sizinuki the man in the moon 

宇奈波良乎 unapara wo rows across the plain of the sea, 

許藝弖天和多流 kogidete wataru his true rudder 

月人乎登祜 TUKWI PITO wotokwo plunging into the water. 

 


地 


OJ: di OC: *draih 

LH: dih EMC: dih GO: di KN: ti 

NOM: địa SV: địa SK: ti 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. A few examples appear in Kojiki: 宇比 
地邇神 ‘the deity Upidini’ (KG), 意富斗能地神 ‘the deity Opotwonodi’ (KG). 
This phonogram also appears in some Nara era documents: 加地 Kadi. 

Man’yōshū uses this phonogram once: 

MYS 4220 

古之地乎左之氐 kwosidi wo sasite …from the day we parted, 

波布都多能 papu tuta no like vines down different paths, 

和可礼尓之欲理 wakarenisi ywori I headed for the Koshi Road. 

 

尼 


OJ: di OC: *nri 

LH: ṇi EMC: ṇi LMC: ndri GO: ni KN: di 

NOM: nầy, ni, nơi, SV: ni, nậc SK: ni, nil 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the CBS. Miyake (1999:791) reconstructs 泥 as LMC 
ndre, suggesting that 尼 should also have been ndri. I have modified 
Pulleyblank’s LMC to reflect this. 

This graph appears in Nihon shoki in three annotational notes: 彦舅此云比 
古尼 “ ‘Prince-uncle’ is read pikwodi” (NSG), 埿土此云于毘尼 “ ‘Mud’ is 
read upidi” (NSG), 沙土此云須毘尼 “ ‘Muddy sand’ is read supidi” (NSG). 
Interestingly, when this phonogram is used in poetry it is used with its EMC 
reading of ni (which see). 

 

泥 


OJ: di OC: *nî or *nîh 

LH: nei or neih EMC: niei LMC: ndiaj GO: nai KN: dei 

NOM: nê, nệ, nè, nể SV: nê, nệ SK: ni 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. I have followed Miyake (1999:791) and 
reconstruct LMC as ndiaj. 

This graph appears in three poems in the beta section of Nihon shoki’s poetry. 
Below is one example: 

NSK 31 

阿布瀰能瀰 apumi no mi We captured at Uji 

齋多能和多利珥 seta no watari ni the birds diving for food 

介豆區苔利 kaduku tori at the Seta Ferry 

多那伽瀰須疑氐 tanakami sugwite on the Sea of Afumi 

于泥珥等邏倍莵 udi ni torapetu when we passed over Tanakami. 

 

旎 


OJ: di OC: *nrê 

LH: ṇe EMC: ṇjeh LMC: ndeyh GO: ni KN: di 

NOM: NA SV: nỷ SK: ni 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears in three beta section poems 
in Nihon shoki. 

NSK 42 

知破椰臂苔 tipaya pito Endowed with power 

于旎能和多利珥 udi no watari ni you potent people 

佐烏刀利珥 sawo twori ni who hold the staff. 

破揶鷄務臂苔辭 payakyemu pito si at the ferry of Uji— 

和餓毛胡珥虚務 wa ga mwokwo ni komu come rescue me, companions! 

 

膩 


OJ: di OC: *nris 

LH: ṇis EMC: ṇih LMC: ndrih GO: ni KN: di 

NOM: NA SV: nhị SK: ni 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. I have followed Miyake (1999:791) 
who reconstructs this as LMC ndrih. This phonogram appears six times in 
annotational notes, and twice in the alpha section of Nihon shoki poetry: 鞍橋此 
云矩羅膩 “ ‘The name Kurazi’ is called kuradi” (NSG), and 味經此云阿膩賦 
“ ‘The name Ajifu’ is called adipu” (NSG). 

NSK 107 

伊波能杯儞 ipa no pe ni On top of a rock 

古佐屢渠梅野倶 kwosaru kome yaku a cute monkey cooks rice. 

渠梅多儞母 kome danimo Come and eat the rice 

多礙底騰裒囉栖 tagete toporase then go on through, 

歌麻之々能烏膩 kamasisi no wodi you old goat. 

 

道 


OJ: di OC: *lûʔ 

LH: douʔ EMC: dâuʔ GO: dau KN: tau 

NOM: đạo, dạo SV: đáo, đạo SK: two 

Usage / History: 

See the same phonogram under OJ ti. 

 

路 


OJ: di OC: *râkh 

LH: lah EMC: luoh GO: ro KN: ro 

NOM: lộ, trò SV: lộ SK: rwo 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, where 路 ‘road’ suggests to the mind OJ ti ‘road.’ The 
reading of di is the prenasalized version. There is one main toponym in which 
this usage consistently appears: 淡路 APADI, the island of Awaji. Examples 
are also found in Nihon shoki: 淡路 APADI island of Awaji (NSG), and 磯齒 
津路 SIPATUDI the road to Sumiyoshi Shrine (NSG). 

 

縢 


OJ: do OC: *lə̂ ŋ 

LH: dəŋ EMC: dəŋ GO: dou KN: tou 

NOM: NA SV: đằng SK: tung 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in the name of a Paekche 
official 恩率彌縢利 Medori of the third rank, preserved in the record of Keitai 
in Nihon shoki. 

This phonogram appears in Kojiki twice in the name 淤縢山津見神 
OdoYAMATUMI [NO] KAMWI ‘the deity Odoyamatsumi’ (KG), and the word 曾 
富縢 sopodo ‘scarecrow’ (KG). 

This phonogram appears fairly frequently in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 135 

荒礒尓曽 ARISWO niso Out on the desolate rocky shore 

玉藻者生流 TAMAMO PA OPOru gemweed is growing. 

玉藻成 TAMAMO NASU And like that gemweed 

靡寐之兒乎 NABIKENEsi KWO wo she nestles next to me sleeping, 

深海松乃 PUKA MIRU no and like deep young seeweed 

深目手思騰 PUKAMEDE OMOPEdo I think deeply about her, 

左宿夜者 SANESI YWO PA but there are not many nights 

幾毛不有 IKUDA mo ARAZU left that we will spend together. 

延都多乃 PAPU tuta no And like creeping vine 

別之来者 WAKAREsi KUREBA as I have come to part ways 

肝向 KIMO MUKAPU which pains my breast, 

心乎痛 KOKORO wo ITAMI like the liver facing the heart, 

念乍 OMOPITUTU and as I yearn for her 

顧為騰 KAPYERIMI SUREdo I turn back and look, 

大舟之 OPOBUNE NO but I can barely even see 

渡乃山之 WATARI no YAMA NO my wife waving 

黄葉乃 MWOMIDIBA no her sleeves good-bye amidst 

散之乱尓 TIRI NO MAGAPI ni the scattering autumn leaves 

妹袖 IMWO GA SWODE from Mount Ferry, 

清尓毛不見 SAYA nimo MIYEZU which is like a great ship. 

 

杼 


OJ: do OC: *draʔ 

LH: ḍiɑʔ EMC: ḍjwoʔ GO: dyo KN: tyo 

NOM: trữ SV: chữ SK: cye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, appearing as early as the Mino Census 
of 702, where the name 阿杼彌刀御賣 Adomitwo MImye appears. This graph, 
while quite prominent in Kojiki, a work that strives to keep to and do separate 
orthographically, was not very popular in general society. The graph 杼 never 
appears in any of the over 50,000 mokkan that have been cataloged. 

This phonogram appears in Kojiki in examples like: 袁 登 賣 杼母 
wotomyedomo ‘the maidens’ (KG), 知杼理 tidori ‘plovers’ (KG), and 伊呂杼 
irodo ‘siblings of the same mother’ (KG). 

KK 17 

阿米都都 ametutu Like a candy-colored wagtail, 

知杼理麻斯登登 tidori masitoto or a plover, or a bunting 

那杼佐祁流斗米 nado sakyeru twome why the tattooed, sharp eyes? 


I have found only three examples of this phonogram in Nihon shoki, all in the 
same name: 土師連富杼 PAzi MURAZI Podo (NSG). 

This graph is used fairly frequently in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 846 

可須美多都 kasumi tatu Mist rises on this 

那我岐波流卑乎 nagaki parupi wo long spring day— 

可謝勢例杼 kazaseredo I have stuck a sprig of 

伊野那都可子岐 iya natukasiki plum blossom in my hair, but 

烏梅能波那可毛 ume no pana kamo how I long for those plums. 

 

騰 


OJ: do OC: *lə̂ ŋ 

LH: dəŋ EMC: dəŋ GO: dou KN: tou 

NOM: NA SV: đằng SK: tung 

Usage / History: 

See the explanation of this phonogram under 縢 do. 

 

藤 


OJ: do OC: *lə̂ ŋ 

LH: dəŋ EMC: dəŋ GO: dou KN: tou 

NOM: đằng SV: đằng SK: tung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears twice in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 325 

明日香河 ASUKAGAPA Like the rising mist 

川余藤不去 KAPA yodo SARAZU that does not leave the shallows 

立霧乃 TATIKWIRI no of the Asuka River— 

念應過 OMOPISUGU BEKI this longing is not something 

孤悲尓不有國 kwopwi ni ARANAKUNI that will fade from my memory. 

 

特 


OJ: do OC: * də̂ k 

LH: dək EMC: dək LMC: tɦəək GO: doku KN: toku 

NOM: đực, đựợc SV: đặc SK: thuk 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 4398 

大王乃 OPOKIMI no In awe at the august decree of 

美己等可之古美 mikoto kasikwomi the great lord (dispatching me), 

都麻和可礼 tuma wakare I am saddened by having to 

可奈之久波安礼特 kanasiku pa aredo part with my spouse, 

大夫 MASURAWO NO but I arouse my feelings 

情布里於許之 KOKORO puri okosi as a brave man…. 

 

耐 


OJ: do OC: *nə̂ h 

LH: nəh EMC: nậih LMC: ndəj GO: nai, nou KN: tai, tou 

NOM: NA SV: nại SK: nay 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. I have followed Miyake (1999) in 
providing the LMC with a dental to account for the change in Shoki. This graph 
is used six times in the poetry. 

NSK 4 

憶企都茂播 okitu mo pa It comes to the shore 

陛爾播譽戻耐母 pye ni pa yoredomo the seaweed in the offing; 

佐禰耐據茂 sanedoko mo but my wife comes not— 

阿黨播怒介茂譽 atapanu kamo yo refusing to give me a bed. 

播磨都智耐理譽 pamatu tidori yo Ah, the plovers on the beach! 

 

迺 


OJ: do OC: *nə̂ ʔ 

LH: nəʔ EMC: nậiʔ LMC: ndəj GO: nai KN: dai 

NOM: NA SV: nãi SK: nay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. I have followed Miyake (1999) in 
providing the LMC with a dental to account for the change in Shoki. This graph 
appears six times in Nihon shoki. 

NSK 47 

虚呂望虚曾 koromo koso It may be pleasing 

赴多幣茂豫耆 putapye mo yoki to wear two layers of robes, 

瑳用迺虚烏 saywodoko wo but how appalling that you 

那羅陪務耆瀰破 narabemu kimi pa would put two women’s 

介辭古耆呂介茂 kasikwokiro kamo sleeping places side by side. 

 

頭 


OJ: du OC: *dô 

LH: do EMC: dəu GO: du KN: tu 

NOM: đầu SV: đầu SK: twu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. Relics from the Koguryŏ kingdom 
preserve the following name on the Moturu Epitaph: 牟頭婁 Mudurwo, the 
name of a person who apparently lived in the era of King Kwangkaytho in fourth 
century Koguryŏ. The Kwangkaytho stele also contains the name 勾牟客頭 
KumukakVdu. 

Nihon shoki also includes two names of people from the peninsula written 
with 頭: 大市頭 Tasidu (NSG), and 頭霧唎耶陛 Dumuriyapye (in initial 
position this may actually be Tumuriyapye, NSG). This phonogram appears three 
times in the liturgies: 皇御孫之命乃美頭乃御舎仕奉弖 SUME MIMA [NO] 
MIKOTO no midu no MIARAKA TUKAPEMATURIte “serving at the vibrant august 
palace of the imperial grandson…” (NT 10). 

This phonogram is also used twice in the same poem. 

NSK 20 

椰句毛多菟 yakumwo tatu Endowed with power 

伊頭毛多鷄流餓 idumwo takyeru ga the hilt of the Izumo 

波鷄流多知 pakyeru tati warrior’s sword 

菟頭邏佐波磨枳 tudura sapa maki is indeed magnificient— 

佐微那辭珥阿波禮 samwi nasi ni apare sadly it has no blade. 


This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, where it is one of a number of 
phonograms used to represent du. 

MYS 3626 

多都我奈伎 tadu ga naki Headed for the reeds, 

安之敝乎左之弖 asipye wo sasite the cranes cry out 

等妣和多類 tobiwataru as they fly overhead. 

安奈多頭多頭志 ana tadutadusi How lonely it is, 

比等里佐奴礼婆 pitori sanureba to sleep alone. 

 

豆 


OJ: du OC: *dôh 

LH: doh EMC: dəuh GO: du KN: tu 

NOM: đậu SV: đậu SK: twu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. This graph also was used for the 
voiceless counterpart tu (which see), but the earliest known example of this graph 
in the Suiko era corpus appears to transcribe du. The following is from a poem 
preserved in Jōgū shōtoku hōō teisetsu: 

伊我留我乃 ikaruga no In Ikaruga springs water from 

止美能井乃美豆 tomi no WI no midu the fountain of Tomi. 

伊加奈久尓 ikanakuni If I had known she could not 

多義弖麻之母乃 tagete masimono live without that water, 

止美乃井能美豆 tomi no WI no midu I would have let her drink some. 

This phonogram appears a number of times in the liturgies: 皇御孫命能宇 
豆乃幣帛乎 SUME MIMA [NO] MIKOTO no udu no MITEGURA wo “The exalted 
offerings of the Imperial Grandson…” (NT 1). This phonogram appears on a 
number of mokkan: 伊豆国 Idu Province (MK 2247), 出雲評支豆支里 
IDUMWO Village, Kiduki Hamlet (MK 157), and 弖豆支女 TedukiMYE (MK 
204). 

This is the prinicipal phonogram to transcribe du in Kojiki: 美豆良 midura 
‘male hair style’ (KG), 意富加牟豆美命 Opokamudumi [NO] MIKOTO (KG), 
and 和豆良比能宇斯能神 Wadurapi no Usi no KAMWI (KG). 

KK 23 

夜都米佐須 yatume sasu The eight buds come out— 

伊豆毛多祁流賀 idumwo takyeru ga the hilt of the Izumo 

波祁流多知 pakyeru tati warrior’s sword 

都豆良佐波麻岐 tudura sapa maki is indeed magnificient: 

佐味那志爾阿波禮 samwi nasi ni apare sadly it has no blade. 

This phonogram is used three times in the annotational notes, and 28 times in 
the poetry of Nihon shoki: 希見此云梅豆邏志 “ ‘a rare sight’ is read medurasi” 
(NSG), 禹豆麻佐 (the family name of) Udumasa (NSG). 

NSK 75 

曾能阿武嗚 sono amu wo A dragonfly appears 

婀枳豆波野倶譬 akidu paya kupi and devours the horsefly. 

波賦武志謀 papu musi mo Even the crawling insects 

飫裒枳瀰儞麼都羅符 opokimi ni maturapu continue to serve their lord. 


儺我柯陀播 na ga kata pa I shall leave a tribute 

於柯武 okamu for you, 

婀岐豆斯麻野麻登 akidusima yamato Akizushima Yamato. 

This is the principal phonogram to represent du in Man’yōshū. It appears in 
toponyms in Man’yōshū like 伊豆嶋 Idu Island, and in phrases such as 東俗語 
云可豆思賀能麻末能弖胡 “In the eastern language she is called kadusika no 
mama no tegwo,” a legendary name for the daughter of Kadusika Mama. Here 
the apparent reference is that in the eastern language ‘daughter’ is called tegwo 
‘hand-child.’ 

MYS 575 

草香江之 KUSAKAYE NO Like the cranes of the reeds 

入江二求食 IRIYE ni ASARU searching for food at the inlet 

蘆鶴乃 ASITADU no of Kusakae wetlands, 

痛多豆多頭思 ANA tadutadusi how forlorn I am, 

友無二指天 TOMO NASI ni site having no friends. 

This graph also appears five times in the Bussoku stele poems: 

BBS 8 

己乃美阿止乎 kono miato wo Seeking and searching 

多豆祢毛止米弖 tatunemotomete this august footprint 

与伎比止乃 yoki pito no to the land where 

伊麻須久尓々波 imasu kuni nipa the righteous person resides; 

和礼毛麻胃弖牟 ware mo mawitemu I would also venture there, 

毛呂毛呂乎爲弖 moromoro wo wite leading the masses. 

 

逗 


OJ: du OC: NA 

LH: doh EMC: dəuh LMC: tɦəw GO: du KN: tou 

NOM: đậu SV: đậu SK: twu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, though it appears only in Nihon shoki, 
six times in the poetry: 

NSK 95 

婀嗚儞與志 awo ni yosi In the valley of 

乃樂能婆娑摩儞 nara no pasama ni the blue hills of Nara, 

斯々貳暮能 sisizi mono like beasts of prey, he lies 

瀰豆矩陛御暮梨 miduku pyegomori hidden by the banks— 

瀰儺曾々矩 mina sosoku a large catch of tuna, 

思寐能和倶吾嗚 sibi no wakugwo wo the young man, Shibi. 

阿娑理逗那偉能古 asaridunawi no kwo Boars, do not try to find him! 

 

圖 


OJ: du OC: *dâ 

LH: dɑ EMC: duo LMC: tɦuə GO: du KN: to 

NOM: đồ SV: đồ SK: two 

Usage / History: 

See the same character under the heading of tu. 

 


弩 


OJ: du OC: *nâʔ 

LH: nɑʔ EMC: nuoʔ LMC: ndoʔ GO: no, nu KN: do 

NOM: nỗ, nỏ SV: nỗ SK: nwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. Miyake (1999:792) reconstructs LMC 
as ndoq (where -q represents a glottal stop). This graph appears only in one poem 
in Shoki’s poetry: 

NSK 1 

夜句茂多兔 yakumo tatu Endowed with power, 

伊弩毛夜覇餓岐 idumwo yapyegaki this two-fold Izumo fence— 

兔磨語味爾 tuma gome ni to conceal ourselves, 

夜覇餓枳都倶盧 yapyegaki tukuru I have built this two-fold fence. 

贈廼夜覇餓岐廻 sono yapyegaki we Yes, within this two-fold fence! 

 

砮 


OJ: du OC: *nâ or nâʔ 

LH: nɑ, naʔ EMC: nuo, nuoʔ LMC: ndo GO: no, nu KN: do 

NOM: NA SV: nỗ SK: nwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and I follow Miyake (1999:792) in 
reconstructing the LMC with a prenasalized initial. This graph appears once in 
Nihon shoki, in the annotational notes of the record of Great King Jinmu: 珍彦 
此云于砮毘故 “ ‘Rare prince’ this is read udu pikwo” (NSG). 

 

曇 


OJ: dumi, domo OC: NA 

LH: dəm EMC: dəm GO: domu KN: ton 

NOM: NA SV: đàm SK: tam 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears mainly in the family name 阿 
曇 Adumi (KG, NSG). Nihon shoki also preserves the variant usage of 安曇 
Adumi, where 安 may have been selected to indirectly show the prenasalization 
of nd-. A variety of excavated mokkan contain this name, written both as 阿曇 
(MK 3559) and 安曇 (MK 96). Man’yōshū also contains the name 安曇 
Adumi. 

This phonogram is also used to represent domo. One example appears in 
Izumo fudoki: 恵曇 Edomo. This same toponym is also written as 恵杼毛 
Edomo. 

 

土 


OJ: dwo OC: *thâʔ 

LH: thɑʔ EMC: thuoʔ GO: to KN: to 

NOM: thổ SV: thổ SK: thwo, twu 

Usage / History: 

See the explanation of this phonogram under two. 

 

度 


OJ: dwo OC: *dakh 

LH: dɑh EMC: duoh LMC: tɦuə GO: do KN: to 

NOM: độ, đo, đụ SV: độ SK: two 


Usage / History: 

See an explanation of this graph under two. 

 

渡 


OJ: dwo OC: *dakh 

LH: dɑh EMC: duoh LMC: tɦuə GO: do KN: to 

NOM: đò SV: độ SK: two 

Usage / History: 

See an explanation of this graph under two. 

 

奴 


OJ: dwo OC: *nâ 

LH: nɑ EMC: nuo LMC: ndɔ GO: nu KN: do 

NOM: nô, no, nó SV: nô SK: now 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and its usage to transcribe dwo is found 
only in Nihon shoki. Two examples appear in in one poem: 

NSK 28 

烏智箇多能 wotikata no In the direction of the thinly 

阿邏々麻菟麼邏 arara matubara wooded pine grove, 

摩菟麼邏珥 matubara ni we will venture across 

和多利喩祇氐 watari yukite that pine grove. 

菟區喩彌珥 tukuyumi ni Using zelkova bows with 

末利椰塢多具陪 mariya wo tagupe sounding arrowhead arrows, 

宇摩比等破 umapito pa those of noble birth 

于摩譬苔奴知野 umapito dwoti ya will fight with their own kind. 

伊徒姑播茂 itwokwo pa mo Men with relatives 

伊徒姑奴池 itwokwo dwoti will fight together. 

伊裝阿波那 iza apana Commence the battle, 

和例波 ware pa shall we? 

多摩岐波屢 tamaki paru Minister Uti, 

于池能阿層餓 uti no aso ga possessing a strong spirit, 

波邏濃知波 paranuti pa does not have a stomach 

異佐誤阿例椰 isagwo are ya made of pebbles. 

伊裝阿波那 iza apana Commence the battle, 

和例波 ware pa shall we? 

 

怒 


OJ: dwo OC: *nah or *naʔ 

LH: nɑh, naʔ EMC: nuoh LMC: ndɔ GO: nu KN: do 

NOM: nộ, nủa, nọ, nua SV: nộ SK: nwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears only in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 96 

倭例以梨魔志 ware irimasi I went inside 

阿都圖唎 atwo twori and held her leg, 

都麼怒唎絁底 tumadworisite holding the edge of her hem, 

魔倶囉圖唎 makura twori holding her pillow— 


E 

 

 

衣 


OJ: e OC: *ʔəi 

LH: ʔɨi EMC: ʔɨj GO: e KN: i 

NOM: y, e, ì SV: y, ý SK: uy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram does not appear in 
Kojiki or Nihon shoki. The earliest datable example of this graph appears in the 
Lower Fusa Provincial Census of the Yōrō Census (721) in the name 衣比須 
Ebisu. This phonogram appears in the name Emaro on a number of mokkan: 衣 
万呂 (MK 415) and 衣末呂 (unnumbered tablet). It also appears in a rather 
long correspondence tablet: 衣知評平留五十戸旦波博士家 “…at the house of 
the Tanipa Professor (who resides in) the fifty household area of Pyeru of Eti 
District…” (MK 2). 

This phonogram also appears in the poetic sequence from the Bussoku 
sekika: 

BSS 3 

与伎比止乃 yoki pito no I cannot see 

麻佐米尓美祁牟 masame ni mikyemu even the footprints that 

美阿止須良乎 miato sura wo the righteous men must 

和礼波衣美須弖 ware pa emisute have seen before their eyes— 

伊波尓惠利都久 ipa ni werituku engrave them on the rock. 

多麻尓惠利都久 tama ni werituku Engrave them on the jewel. 

The graph 衣 also appears in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 95 

吾者毛也 WARE PA mo ya I have now obtained 

安見兒得有 YASUMIKWO ETARI the hand of Yasumiko. 

皆人乃 MINABITO no I have now obtained 

得難尓為云 EGATE ni SU TO IPU the hand of Yasumiko 

安見兒衣多利 YASUMIKWO etari that everyone said could not be had. 

The cursive form of this phonogram yields the kana form え. 

 

愛 


OJ: e OC: *ʔə̂ ts 

LH: ʔəs > ʔəh EMC: ʔəj LMC: ʔaj GO: ai KN: ai 

NOM: ái SV: ái SK: oy 

Usage / History: 

I place this graph in the LJS. Looking at the phonological background of this 
Chinese phonogram, it seems difficult to imagine that the reading of e came from 
the Chinese phonology, but it is more persuasive when one remembers that many 
/e/ in OJ originate from a diphthong (ai > e). As Mathias (1993) has already 
pointed out, among the ancient corpus, the sound e actually accounts for only 3% 
of all usages of OJ vowels. The existence of this phonogram is often found in old 
place names (愛比賣 Epimye・愛智郡 Eti District), but it is interesting to note 
that this phonogram never appears in the Suiko era corpus. This is likely due to 


the low statistical frequency than anything else. The earliest datable example of 
this graph is found in a register from Yamashiro Province in 733: 愛賣 Emye. 
In Shōsōin documents the toponym Eti District appears: 愛知郡 and 愛智郡. 

There are only two examples of the phonogram 愛 in Shoki’s poetry: 

NSK 126 

美曳之弩能 miyesinwo no The trout of Eshino, 

曳之弩能阿喩 yesinwo no ayu beautiful Mieshino— 

阿喩擧曾播 ayu koso pa It is good for 

施麻倍母曳岐 simape mo yeki you trout to be near the island. 

愛倶流之衞 e kurusiwe Ah, how painful 

奈疑能母騰 nagwi no moto to be under the water-greens 

制利能母騰 seri no moto to be under the water cress. 

阿例播倶流之衞 are pa kurusiwe I am in pain. 

 

亞 


OJ: e OC: *ʔah or *ʔrâh 

LH: ʔah EMC: ʔaɨ > ʔɛ: GO: a KN: a 

NOM: á, a SV: á SK: a 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears on a mokkan that appears to 
contain a Buddhist chant: 南無阿□□□□□亜□□□□□阿覚 namu 
aXXXXX eXXXXXakaku (MKK 31:93). It also appears twice in Kojiki: 亞亞【音 
引】志夜胡志夜 ee (read these by their sounds) siyagwo siya ‘heh heh, crazy 
fools’ (KK 9). Hokekyō ongi glosses both 啞 and 瘂 as a (Ogura 1995.2:779– 
788), so the reading of e may be a variant that did not survive, as the EMC data 
seem to suggest. 

 

依 


OJ: e OC: *ʔəi 

LH: ʔɨi EMC: ʔɨj GO: e KN: i 

NOM: y SV: y SK: uy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. On a wooden tablet excavated from the 
Fujiwara Palace ruins (fl. 694–710) we find the toponym 依智郡 Eti District 
(MKK 5:81). Another example of this phonogram comes from 709, from the 
Kōfukuji Temple record, writing the same toponym as above, 依智郡. This 
graph also appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 4293 

安之比奇能 asipikwi no This is a gift from 

山行之可婆 YAMA YUKIsikaba the people in the mountains 

山人乃 YAMABITO no who gave it to me when I was 

和礼尓依志米之 ware ni esimesi passing by the mountains, 

夜麻都刀曽許礼 yamaduto so kore which tire the legs. 

 

哀 


OJ: e OC: *ʔə̂ i 

LH: ʔəi EMC: ʔəj LMC: ʔaj GO: ai KN: ai 

NOM: ai SV: ai SK: oy 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears only in Nihon shoki, and 
then only twice: 1) 可愛此云哀 ‘lovable’ is read e (NSG), and 2) 蘆雚此云哀 
都利 ‘the underlay of a thatched roof’ is read eturi (NSG). 

 

埃 


OJ: e OC: *ə̂ 

LH: iə EMC: ʔəj LMC: ʔaj GO: ai KN: ai 

NOM: ai SV: ai SK: ay 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the CBS. This phonogram only appears once in Nihon 
shoki, and because of the semantics (埃 ‘dust or filth’) its usage was generally 
avoided: 可愛此云埃, used to give the proper pronunciation for the burial place 
of Ninigi, the deity who descended from heaven to rule Yamato. He is said to 
have been buried on Mount E. 

 

榎 


OJ: e OC: *krâh 

LH: kah EMC: kaɨ > kɛ: GO: ke KN: ka 

NOM: giá, giả, hạ SV: giá SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ enokwi ‘hackberry tree,’ or more precisely the 
Celtis sinensis, in Japanese literally the ‘e tree.’ The Japanese of the late Asuka 
era took the phonogram to represent the first syllable e. Likely the word may 
have been written 榎之木 (ENOKWI). As yet there are no surviving examples of 
this phonogram before the Nara era. 

The earliest datable example is from the Chikuzen Census of 702: 榎本勝 
EMOTO KATU. It is interesting to note that a wooden tablet excavated from the 
Fujiwara Palace ruins (fl. 694–710) contains the name 榎本連安比止 EMOTO 
MURAZI Apito (MK 1488). 

This usage appears in Man’yōshū in one name: 榎井王 Prince ENOWI. It 
also is used twice in the poetry. 

MYS 983 

山葉 YAMA NO PA NO How delightful to see 

左佐良榎壮子 sasara E WOTOKWO the light of the tiny fine 

天原 AMA NO PARA young man hanging on 

門度光 TWO WATARU PIKARI the ridge of the mountain, 

見良久之好藻 MIrakusi YOSI MO about to cross the plain of heaven. 

 

荏 


OJ: e OC: *nəmʔ 

LH: ńimʔ EMC: nyim GO: nimu KN: zimu 

NOM: nhẫm SV: nhẫm SK: im 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ e, a type of bean, known as Perilla 
ocimoides, from which perilla oil is extracted. There is one example in Kojiki, in 
a name in the record of Kaika: 山代之荏名津比賣, YAMASIRO NO ENATUpimye 
(KG). It is also seen in the Izumo register of 739 in the toponym: 荏原里 
EBARA Village. This phonogram also appears twice in Man’yōshū, both to write 
the same toponym: 荏原郡 District of EBARA (headnotes to MYS 4415, 4418). 


得 


OJ: e OC: *tə̂ k 

LH: tək EMC: tək GO: toku KN: toku 

NOM: đắc, đác SV: đắc SK: tuk 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ e, the infinitive of the verb u ‘to get, 
obtain.’ This usage only appears in Man’yōshū in the toponym 得名津 ENATU 
(MYS 283). 

 

朴 


OJ: e OC: *phok 

LH: pok EMC: phaɨwk GO: foku KN: faku 

NOM: phác, phắc, vóc SV: phác SK: pak 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ e ‘Chinese hackberry tree.’ This usage is 
found only in Nihon shoki, and then only used in a family name. It is possible 
that the word /e/ is from the peninsula, and originally meant ‘Chinese hackberry,’ 
and the immigrants to the Japanese archipelago carried the word, and named the 
closest tree, the catalpa 榎 for it. This usage appears in the toponym 朴井 
ENOWI, found in the Suiko record (NSG), and in the names 物部朴井連椎子 
MONONOBYE ENOWI MURAZI SIPI [NO] OMI (NSG), and 朴市秦造田來津 
ETI [NO] PADA [NO] MIYATUKWO KUTU (NSG). 

 

可愛 



OJ: e OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: NA GO: NA KN: NA 

NOM: NA SV: NA SK: NA 

Usage / History: 

This usage is based on Chinese semantics where 可愛 means ‘lovable.’ In 
OJ the closest approximation to this was e. This usage only appears in Nihon 
shoki: 可愛此云埃, “(The burial mound of Ninigi is written) 可愛 and this is 
read e” (NSG). 

 

 

 

F 

 

 

For phonograms traditionally listed under ha-gyō (はひふへほ) see the 
respective readings under OJ: p-, i. e. pa, pi, pu, etc. 

 

 


G 

 

 

我 



OJ: ga OC: *ŋâiʔ 

LH: ŋɑiʔ EMC: ŋa GO: ga KN: ga 

NOM: ngã, ngả SV: ngã SK: a 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It is one of the most common 
phonograms used for the prenasalized velar ga. One example from Paekche 
sources quoted in Nihon shoki is in the record of Buretsu: the king of Paekche 
dispatches an envoy to Wa named 斯我君 Siga KIMI. 

The phonogram 我 lost its popularity by the middle of the Asuka era. One 
reason is perhaps related to semantics: 我 is the first person pronoun, and like 
many European countries shying away from capitalizing ‘I,’ the ancient Japanese 
appear to have shied away from the overuse of the first person. The other graph 
for ga, 賀, on the other hand, meant ‘congratulate,’ and this graph became quite 
popular. Kojiki uses 賀 180 times, compared to only once for 我 (that single 
example being a note in the record of Kōgen, where Swoga [NO] ISIKAPA [NO] 
Sukune 蘇賀石河宿禰 is noted as being the founder of the Swoga [NO] OMI 蘇 
我臣). It is also important to note that of the 29 examples in Kojiki poetry of wa 
ga ‘I-POSS’ (or ‘I-SUB’) three examples are transcribed 和何, and 26 are 和賀. 
The graph 我 is never used. This phonogram appears on a number of mokkan: 
宗我部 SwogaBYE (MK 2598), 伊我部 IgaBYE (MK 1305), 矢田部志我麻呂 
YATABYE Sigamaro (unnumbered tablet). 

Reflecting the antiquity of its source material, the opposite is true of Shoki. 
The graph 賀 appears 35 times in Shoki, but 我 is used over 150 times. There 
are eight examples in annotational notes, and 40 in poetry. 吾夫君、此云阿我 
儺勢 “ ‘My beloved husband’ is read a ga nase” (NSG). 

NSK 5 

飫企都鄧利 okitu tori Birds in the offing— 

軻茂豆勾志磨爾 kamoduku simi ni ducks gather on the island. 

和我謂禰志 wa ga onesi As long as I live 

伊茂播和素邏珥 imwo pa wasurazi I will always remember 

譽能據鄧馭鄧母 yo no kotogoto mo the maiden with whom I slept. 

This is the primary phonogram to transcribe ga in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3580 

君之由久 KIMI GA yuku If fog rises from 

海邊乃夜杼尓 UMIpye no yado ni your lodging on the beach 

奇里多々婆 kiri tataba where you will go 

安我多知奈氣久 a ga tati nageku then realize that it is coming 

伊伎等之理麻勢 iki to sirimase from the breath of my laments. 

This phonogram appears twice in the Bussoku poetic sequence. 


BSS 14 

舍加乃美阿止 saka no miato I copy the footprints 

伊波尓宇都志於伎 ipa ni utusioki of Saka onto the stone, 

由伎米具利 yukimeguri and walk around it 

宇夜麻比麻都利 uyamapimaturi showing my reverence; 

和我与波乎閇牟 wa ga yo pa wopemu my generation will be complete. 

己乃与波乎閇牟 kono yo pa wopemu This time it will be complete. 

 

奇 



OJ: ga OC: *kai 

LH: kɨɑi EMC: ɡiə̆ GO: ki KN: ki 

NOM: cả, cơ, ký SV: cơ, ký SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS, as noted under 奇 OJ: ka. While it 
does appear that this phonogram transcribes ka, there are alternations that show it 
also transcribed ga. 

Two examples from Shoki illustrate the use of this phonogram within 
peninsular names: 印奇臣 Iga OMI, but this might actually be a transcription of 
Inka This is doubtless an older, Paekche-style form of the Japanese name 伊賀臣 
(Ienaga et al. 1986.2:82, n1). The other example is 用奇多 Ywogata, a person 
who has the surname of Mononobe (NSG). The phonogram 奇 later resurfaces 
some 50 years later in Japanese records, but then it represents kwi, which likely 
originated from ko+i (cf. 奇 OJ: kwi). Finally, this graph is also used to 
transcribe the name of the Swoga family in the early Suiko records (the Gangōji 
temple record and the Tenjukokushuchō at Chūgūji [ca. 622]), where the surname 
is written 巷奇 SWOga. 

 

宜 


OJ: ga OC: *ŋai 

LH: ŋɨɑi EMC: ŋiă GO: gi KN: gi 

NOM: NA SV: nghi SK: uy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. Scholars vacillate on the reading of this 
graph, some saying it represents gwi, others ge. While no Nom data exist for this 
graph, there are two related graphs in Nom: 𦖑 nghe or 𣦍 ngay, which would 
suggest that either reading may be viable. The last example is relevant here, since 
it is closest to what the Japanese would have used for ga. 

This graph 宜 is also of some antiquity, appearing in the Suiko corpus, 
though some may consider the reading to be controversial. This graph appears in 
the name 巷宜, traditionally read Swoga (the Soga family). Consider also that 
another Suiko era source writes the same name as 巷奇. This strongly suggests 
that these two usages are transcribing the name swoga, later written as 蘇我. 
There is also a single example of 嗽加 swoga in the ancient records. 

 

賀 


OJ: ga OC: *ɡâih 

LH: ɡɑih EMC: ɣa LMC: xɦa GO: ga KN: ka 

NOM: hạ SV: hạ SK: ha 

Usage / History: 

See the same phonogram under OJ: ka. 


何 


OJ: ga OC: *ɡâi 

LH: ɡai EMC: ɣa GO: ga KN: ka 

NOM: hà SV: hà SK: ha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The oldest known example of this 
phonogram appears in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu, all examples coming from the 
threnody. 

伊加留我乃 ikaruga no Our Great Ruler’s name 

止美能乎何波乃 tomi no wogapa no will never be forgotten, 

多叡婆許曾 tayeba koso even if the brook 

和何於保支美乃 wa ga opokimi no Tomi in Ikaruga 

弥奈和須良叡米 mina wasurayeme should cease to flow in its bed. 

This graph is used in Kojiki, four times in the poetry in Book 1. 

KK 3 

夜知富許能 yatipoko no The august deity 

迦微能美許等 kamwi no mikoto Yachi Hoko— 

奴延久佐能 nuyekusa no as I am a woman 

賣迩志阿礼婆 mye ni si areba tender as grass 

和何許許呂 wa ga kokoro and my heart 

宇良須能登理叙 urasu no tori zo is a bird on the sandbank. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, mainly in Book 5, though there 
are ten examples scattered in other books of the anthology: 

MYS 822 

和何則能尓 wa ga sono ni The plum blossoms 

宇米能波奈知流 ume no pana tiru in my gardent are scattering. 

比佐可多能 pisakata no Or is it that snow 

阿米欲里由吉能 ame ywori yuki no is falling from the sky, 

那何列久流加母 nagarekuru kamo the far-off sky? 

 

河 


OJ: ga OC: *ɡâi 

LH: ɡɑi EMC: ɣa GO: ga, gaa KN: ka 

NOM: hà SV: hà SK: ha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the the LBS. This graph also appears in Nihon 
shoki in the place name 駿河國 Suruga Province (NSG). This graph appears a 
number of times in Man’yōshū. Some examples transcribe Suruga. The majority 
of the other cases appear as 河波 gapa ‘river’ (MYS 855, 856, 861, 863), where 
the graph 河 ‘river’ is used as both as a phonogram and logogram to write the 
prenasalized form of kapa. 

 

蛾 


OJ: ga OC: *ŋâi 

LH: ŋɑi EMC: ŋa GO: ga KN: ga 

NOM: NA SV: nga SK: a 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LBS. It appears only in Man’yōshū, and then 
a mere three times. In the following poem it appears twice. 


MYS 2642 

燈之 TOMOSIBWI NO Flittering in the light 

陰尓蚊蛾欲布 KAGE ni KAgaywopu of the torches 

虚蝉之 UTUSEMI NO I can see 

妹蛾咲状思 IMWO ga WEMAPIsi the image of the smile of 

面影尓所見 OMOKAGE ni MIYU my beloved of this world. 

The first instance in line two is an artistic game, where 蚊蛾 ‘mosquito and 
moth’ together form kaga ‘light.’ That is fitting as there are four examples of 
graphs in this poem that represent insects (蚊 ‘mosquito,’ 蛾 ‘moth’ twice, and 
蝉 ‘cicada’), the inferred meaning being that insects are attracted to the light of a 
torch, flittering in the light like the image of his beloved. 

 

餓 


OJ: ga OC: *ŋâih 

LH: ŋɑih EMC: ŋa GO: ga KN: ga 

NOM: NA SV: nga, ngã SK: a 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LBS, but it only appears in Shoki, found in 
the early strata, or older level of orthography. It appears 62 times in the early 
poetry, and four times in the annotative commentary. An example from the 
record of Jinmu is 一柱騰宮此云阿斯毘苔徒鞅餓離能宮, “ ‘A palace with one 
pillar’ in the vernacular is asi pitotu agari no MIYA” (NSG). 

NSK 1 

夜句茂多兔 yakumo tatu Endowed with power, 

伊弩毛夜覇餓岐 idumwo yapyegaki this two-fold Izumo fence— 

兔磨語味爾 tuma gome ni to conceal ourselves, 

夜覇餓枳都倶盧 yapyegaki tukuru I have built this two-fold fence. 

贈廼夜覇餓岐廻 sono yapyegaki we Yes, within this two-fold fence! 

 

峨 


OJ: ga OC: *ŋâi 

LH: ŋai EMC: ŋa LMC: ŋa GO: ga KN: ga 

NOM: NA SV: nga SK: a 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, appearing once in the poetry of Nihon 
shoki: 

NSK 97 

莒母唎矩能 kumoriku no In the hidden land, 

簸覩細能哿波庚 patuse no kapa yu the bamboo flowing down 

那峨礼倶屢 nagarekuru the Hatsuse River— 

駄開能 take no wonderful, flourishing bamboo 

以矩美娜開余嚢開 ikumidake yodake with long joints and leaves. 

 

俄 


OJ: ga OC: *ŋâi 

LH: ŋɑi EMC: ŋa LMC: ŋa GO: ga KN: ga 

NOM: nga SV: nga SK: a 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It only appears in Shoki, restricted to a 
single example in a note found in the second book of Shoki: 倭文神此云斯図梨 
俄未, “ ‘The deity Shito’ is read sitwogamwi” (NSG). 

 

鵝 


OJ: ga OC: *ŋâi 

LH: ŋɑi EMC: ŋa LMC: ŋa GO: ga KN: ga 

NOM: NA SV: nga SK: a 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears only in Shoki, five times in 
the annotational notes and three times in the poetry. One example from the 
commentary is: 顯神明之憑談、此云歌牟鵝可梨 “ ‘Being possessed by the 
visible deity’ is read kamugakari” (NSG). 

NSK 113 

耶麻鵝播爾 yamagapa ni There are two mandarin ducks 

烏志賦頴都威底 wosi putatu wite at the mountain stream, 

陁虞毘預倶 tagupi yoku paired off so nicely. 

陁虞陛屢伊慕乎 tagupyeru imo wo Who has taken my beloved 

多例柯威爾雞武 tare ka winikyemu who paired off so well with me? 

 

義 


OJ: ge OC: *ŋaih 

LH: ŋɨɑih EMC: ŋia GO: gi KN: gi 

NOM: nghĩa, nghì SV: nghĩa SK: uy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, appearing once in the Suiko corpus, in 
the toponym 牟義都国 Mugetu Province. Various scholars, depending on what 
era of Chinese they are using, have read this place name Mugetu or Mugitu. It is 
clear in Sino-Korean that the morpheme-initial velar nasal has lenited to zero: 
*nguy > uy. As the LH evidence shows, this graph has a mid vowel with an offglide. 


This graph appears somewhat frequently in Man’yōshū, but is read gwi by 
most scholars. The only firm example I can find in Man’yōshū where 義 clearly 
represents ge is MYS 3885, in the stanza 吾美義波 A GA mige pa ‘as for my 
stomach.’ This is a hapax in Old Japanese, but Shinsen jikyō, an early Heian 
character dictionary that preserves vestiges of Old Japanese, contains the entry: 
胘肚也、牛百葉、三介 ‘Stomach: it is the belly. An oxen abomasum is mige.’ 

This phonogram represents ge in a poem from a fragment of the Tango 
fudoki: 

夜麻等弊爾 yamatopye ni From the direction of Yamato 

加是布企阿義天 kaze pukiagete the wind blows upward 

久母婆奈礼 kumobanare and scatters the clouds— 

所企遠理等母与 sokiwori tomo yo though you and I shall be apart 

和遠和須良須奈 wa wo wasurasu na please do not forget me. 

This graph also appears once in a poem carved into the Footprints of the 
Buddha stone: 


BSS 9 

舍加乃美阿止 saka no miato The august footprints of Shaka 

伊波尓宇都志於伎 ipa ni utusioki we transfer to the stone 

宇夜麻比弖 uyamapite and we revere them. 

乃知乃保止氣尓 noti no potoke ni To the Buddha of the future 

由豆利麻都良牟 yudurimaturamu we intend to humbly offer these. 

佐々義麻宇佐牟 sasagemausamu We intend to present these. 

 

宜 


OJ: ge OC: *ŋai 

LH: ŋɨɑi EMC: ŋia GO: gi KN: gi 

NOM: nghi, nghí, ngơi SV: nghi SK: uy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The Nom data for this graph is 
somewhat mixed, but considering the reading ngơi with data from two related 
graphs in Nom, 𦖑 nghe or 𣦍 ngay, I believe this is sufficient evidence to 
demonstrate that this graph transcribed OJ ge. As noted under 宜 OJ gwi, this 
graph transcribes both OJ gwi and ge. While true, it is telling that this graph is 
only used in Kojiki to transcribe ge and not gwi. Examples include 於大御酒宇 
良宜而 OPOMIKWI NI urageTE ‘(he) became excited from the august wine...’ 
(KG). 此者志良宜歌也 KO PA sirage UTA NARI ‘This is a sirage song’ (KG). 

KK 65 

夜多能 yata no The one stalk of 

比登母登須宜波 pito moto suge pa sedge on the Yata Plain, 

比登理袁理登母 pitori wori tomo even if I am all alone 

意富岐彌斯 opokimi si and my great lord 

與斯登岐許佐婆 yosi to kikosaba should declare that it is good 

比登理袁理登母 pitori wori tomo then I will remain alone. 

The confusion regarding the reading of this phonogram originates from the 
text of Man’yōshū, where 宜 is used 11 times to represent gwi, and 12 times for 
ge. However, the distribution within the anthology illustrates that there is very 
little overlap, so either different eras of poets used the phonogram for one of the 
two LJS readings, or different traditions existed when the various volumes 
(books) of the anthology were being compiled. 

 

MYS (Book) 

# of poems with 宜 gwi 

# of poems with 宜 ge 

5 

2 

7 

6 

2 

Ø 

14 

6 

Ø 

15 

1 

Ø 

18 

Ø 

3 

19 

Ø 

2 



 

Thus, other than a two-poem overlap in Book 5, these two usages do not 
overlap. Is it possible that the two poems in Book 5 have been misread as gwi 
instead of ge? This is highly unlikely, as both poems contain the same word: 
yanagwi ‘willow,’ etymologically yana + no + kwi ‘a yana tree.’ Interestingly, of 


the seven examples in Book 5, six are parts of verbs or stative verbs. An example 
appears below. 

MYS 799 

大野山 OPONWO YAMA Mist spreads out over 

紀利多知和多流 kwiri tatiwataru the entire face of Mount Ōno. 

和何那宜久 wa ga nageku Mist spreads out, 

於伎蘇乃可是尓 okiswo no kaze carried by the wind from 

紀利多知和多流 kwiri tatiwataru the breath of my lament. 

 

礙 


OJ: ge OC: *ŋə̂ kh 

LH: ŋəh EMC: ŋəj GO: gai KN: gai 

NOM: ngại SV: ngại SK: ay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The graph 礙 is the original, 
sometimes found in texts abbreviated to 碍 or further simplified to 㝵. 

This usage (as well as that of 碍・皚・㝵) is found only in Nihon shoki or 
Man’yōshū. There are two examples in annotational notes, and seven in the 
poetry of Nihon shoki: 荳角、此云娑佐礙 “ ‘the name Sasage’ is read sasage” 
(NSG). 

NSK 76 

野須瀰斯志 yasumisisi Ruler of all— 

倭我飫裒枳瀰能 wa ga opokimi no my great lord journeyed 

阿蘇麼斯志 aswobasisi here to hunt boar. 

斯々能 sisi no The cry of the boar 

宇頴枳舸斯固瀰 utaki kasikwomi terrified me and I fled. 

倭我尼㝵能裒利志 wa ga nige noborisi To the black alder 

阿理嗚能宇倍能 ari wo no upe no on top of the hill 

婆利我曳陀 pari ga yeda I climbed into the branches— 

阿西嗚 ase wo Protect me! 

An altered form of this phonogram, 㝵, appears in Book 15 of Man’yōshū 
three times, but all three poems contain the same verb tuge ‘informing, telling,’ 
represented the same way: 都㝵. One example appears below. 

MYS 3612 

安乎尓与之 awoni yosi How nice if there were people 

奈良能美也故尓 nara no miyakwo ni traveling to the Nara Capital 

由久比等毛我母 yuku pito mogamo where the green earth is good. 

久左麻久良 kusamakura I would like to tell the boats 

多妣由久布祢能 tabi yuku pune no with the wayfarers and their 

登麻利都㝵武仁 tomari tugemu ni straw pillows where to dock. 

 

碍 


OJ: ge OC: *ŋə̂ kh 

LH: ŋəh EMC: ŋəj GO: gai KN: gai 

NOM: ngại SV: ngại SK: ay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram is a vulgar form of 礙 (see above). 

 


㝵 


OJ: ge OC: *ŋə̂ kh 

LH: ŋəh EMC: ŋəj GO: gai KN: gai 

NOM: ngại SV: ngại SK: ay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram is related to 碍, which is itself a vulgar form of 礙. Thus, 
these graphs are interrelated, and have the same Sino-Xenic readings. See 礙 
above. 

 

皚 


OJ: ge OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: ŋəj LMC: ŋaj GO: gai KN: gai 

NOM: ngai SV: ngai SK: ay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears four times in the poetry in 
Nihon shoki. 

NSK 97 

倭我彌細麼 wa ga miseba When I gaze down 

都奴娑播符 tunwo sapapu on Iware Pond 

以簸例能伊開能 ipare no ike no with rocks covered in vines 

美那矢駄府 minasitapu even the fish 

紆鳴謨 uwo mo come to the surface 

紆陪儞堤堤那皚矩 upe ni dete nageku and lament your parting. 

 

祇 


OJ: gi OC: *ke 

LH: kie, ɡɨi EMC: ɡjiə GO: gi KN: ki 

NOM: chỉ SV: ký, khì, kì SK: ki 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS, appearing in a Paekche inscription 
(Sathaikcicek Stele 砂宅智積碑, ca. 654 CE), in the name of a fortress: 奈祇城 
*nagi fortress. This graph later appears in the Bungo Census of 702 in the name 
爾祇賣 Nigimye. This phonogram appears in Man’yōshū in one poem. 

MYS 3243 

處女等之 WOTOMYERA NO At the bay of Nagato, 

麻笥垂有 WOKE NI TARETARU long like the hemp thread 

續麻成 UMIWO NASU spun by the maidens 

長門之浦丹 NAGATWO NO URA NI who lower it into the bucket, 

朝奈祇尓 ASA nagi ni as I come to long for 

満来塩之 MITIKURU SIPO NO my beloved, 

夕奈祇尓 YUPU nagi ni my longing is like 

依来波乃 YOSEKURU NAMI no the morning waves 

彼塩乃 SONO SIPO no that come at high tide, 

伊夜益舛二 iya MASU MASU ni or the evening waves 

彼浪乃 SONO NAMI no of that come rolling in, 

伊夜敷布二 iya SIKU SIKU ni it continues to increase. 

 

藝 


OJ: gi OC: *ŋets 

LH: ŋias EMC: ŋjiaj GO: gei KN: gei 

NOM: nghệ, nghề SV: nghệ SK: yey 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. There is only one example from a 
supposed Paekche name (actually a person from Cheju Island, but the island was 
long under Paekche influence) in Shoki: in the second year of Tenmu we find the 
name 王子久麻藝, Prince Kumagi. Earlier, however, in the eighth year of Tenji 
his name is written 久麻伎, showing the polyphony of 伎, where it can 
represent both ki and gi. This phonogram appears on a number of mokkan: 安芸 
国 安芸郡 Agi Province Agi District (MK 1188), 椋 橋 部 造 伊芸美 
KURAPASIBYE MIYATUKWO Igimi (unnumbered tablet). 

Kojiki also uses 藝 for /gi/, but 岐 is still used occasionally for /gi/. All 
told, Kojiki uses 藝 54 times in the poetry and annotational notes, but 岐 (as 
gi) only appears six times：伊多玖佐夜藝帝阿理祁理 itaku sayagite arikeri ‘it 
seems that (the land of Ashihara) is very noisy’ (KG). 

KK 9 

宇陀能 uda no In the high 

多加紀爾 takakwi ni fort of Uda 

志藝和那波留 sigi wana paru a trap for snipe I set, 

和賀麻都夜 wa ga matu ya and as I waited— 

志藝波佐夜良受 sigi pa sayarazu it did not catch a snipe. 

This phonogram appears once in the annotational notes, and 13 times in the 
poetry of Shoki: 饒速日、此云儞藝波椰卑 ‘The deity Nigi Hayahi is read nigi 
payapi’ (NSG). Regarding the poetry, an interesting example is found in the Uda 
poem, which is the same as KK 9 above. I only quote the relevant stanzas. 

NSK 7 

辭藝和奈破蘆 sigi pana paru A trap for snipe I set, 

和餓末菟夜 wa ga matu ya and as I waited— 

辭藝破佐夜羅孺 sigi pa sayarazu it did not catch a snipe. 

This is the primary phonogram in Man’yōshū to represent gi. 

MYS 8 

熟田津尓 NIKITATU ni When I was about to board 

船乗世武登 PUNANORAsemu to a ship at Nikita Port, waiting 

月待者 TUKWI MATEBA for the moon, the tide came in 

潮毛可奈比沼 SIPO mo kanapiNU allowing us to depart. 

今者許藝乞菜 IMA PA kogiIDE NA Shall we not row out presently? 

 

儀 


OJ: gi OC: *ŋai 

LH: ŋɨɑi EMC: ŋia LMC: ŋi GO: gi KN: gi 

NOM: nghi, nghì SV: nghi SK: uy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It only appears in Nihon shoki, used 
once in the annotational notes. That single example appears in Book 2: 覓国此 
云矩貳磨儀 “ ‘search for good land’ is read kuni magi” (NSG). 

 

蟻 


OJ: gi OC: *ŋaiʔ 

LH: ŋɨɑiʔ EMC: ŋia LMC: ŋi GO: gi KN: gi 

NOM: NA SV: nghĩ, nghị SK: uy 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It is used only in Shoki, and then only 
three times in the poetry. 

NSK 118 

阿須箇我播 asukagapa There is no end 

瀰儺蟻羅毘都都 minagirapitutu to the robust flow of 

喩矩瀰都能 yuku midu no the Asuka River— 

阿比娜謨儺倶母 apida mo naku mo How I will continue 

於母保喩屢母 omopoyuru kamo to think of him endlessly. 

 

𡺸 


OJ: gi OC: *ɡri 

LH: ɡɨ EMC: ɡji GO: gi KN: ki 

NOM: NA SV: kỳ SK: ki 

Usage / History: 

The ancient phonology of this obscure phonogram is not clear. Morohashi 
(1976:4.297) notes that the meaning is unclear, but the Chinese pronunciation is 
ɡie (義未詳。。。巨支切). I have reconstructed the phonology according to 耆. 

This obscure phonogram appears once in Shoki, in poem NSK 64: 哆𡺸摩知 
烏能流 tagimadi wo noru … “[She] informed me to take the road to Tagima.” 
This may be an old relic for representing the place name Tagima. 

 

其 


OJ: go OC: *ɡə 

LH: ɡɨə EMC: ɡɨ GO: gi KN: ki 

NOM: cà SV: kỳ, kì SK: ki, kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The reconstructions of earlier states of 
Chinese postulate a mid, unrounded vowel, while most of the Sino-Xenic data 
argue for a high, front, rounded vowel. The Sino-Korean kuy is the only evidence 
that this might have been a mid, unrounded vowel. Add to this data from Nôm, 
where we have a mid, unrounded vowel. Also, Nom preserves a related graph, 
箕 kia, which matches nicely with the Later Han data. On this evidence, it seems 
clear that what is currently preserved as GO gi goes back to an earlier gwi, which, 
based on the SK data, originated from *go-i. Analogous to using the bound form 
of 木 ‘tree’ for ko < kwi < *ko-i, it thus seems clear that 其 was used to 
represent go. 

The earliest datable usage appears in the Chikuzen census of 702, in the 
name 許其志 Kogosi. This phonogram appears in Kojiki and Man’yōshū. A 
simple example from Kojiki is found in the second poem: 

KK 2 

伊斯多布夜 isitapu ya Those messengers of the divers 

阿麻波勢豆加比 amapasedukapi who dive under the rocks 

許登能 koto no have told these things, 

加多理其登母 katarigoto mo even have related 

許遠婆 ko woba these things. 

This phonogram appears in Man’yōshū rather frequently. The following 
chōka contains this phonogram three times. 


MYS 3625 

由久美都能 yuku midu no I am a person of the world 

可敝良奴其等久 kapyeranu gotoku that leaves not even a trace, 

布久可是能 puku kaze no like the water that flows on 

美延奴我其登久 miyenu ga gotoku and never returns, 

安刀毛奈吉 atwo mo naki or like the wind that blows 

与能比登尓之弖 yo no pito ni site but cannot be seen; 

和可礼尓之 wakarenisi I will sleep alone on the sleeves 

伊毛我伎世弖思 imwo ga kisete si of the well-worn robe 

奈礼其呂母 naregoromo that my beloved put on me 

蘇弖加多思吉弖 swode kata sikite before she departed 

比登里可母祢牟 pitori kamo nemu spread out on the floor. 

 

期 


OJ: go OC: *ɡə or *kə 

LH: ɡɨə, kɨə EMC: ɡɨ, kɨ GO: go, gi KN: ki 

NOM: kỳ, cờ SV: kỳ, kì SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram is used twice in the 
imperial edicts preserved in Shoku Nihongi: 是以汝等母今日詔大命乃期等君 
臣祖子乃理遠忘事無久 KOKO WO MOTITE IMASITATI mo KEPU NORITAMAPU 
OPOMIKOTO no goto, KIMI YATUKWO OYAKWO no KOTOWARI wo WASURURU KOTO 
NAku ‘Hereupon, like the great august words that have been declared today, you 
too will not forget the logic between lord and servant, and parent and child...’ 
(SM 11). 

This phonogram appears rather frequently in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 828 

比等期等尓 pitogoto ni Though each one of us 

乎理加射之都々 worikazasitutu enjoys breaking a branch 

阿蘇倍等母 aswobedomo and putting it in our hair, 

伊夜米豆良之岐 iya medurasiki the sight of the plum blossoms 

烏梅能波奈加母 ume no pana kamo never grows tiring. 

This phonogram appears twice in the Bussoku poetic sequence. 

BSS 16 

己乃美阿止乎 kono miato wo Respectfully gazing 

麻婆利麻都礼婆 mabarimatureba at these footprints, 

阿止奴志乃 ato nusi no how we think of 

多麻乃与曾保比 tama no yosopopi the jeweled figure of the owner 

於母保由留可母 omopoyuru kamo of these footprints. 

美留期止毛阿留可 miru goto mo aru ka As if we see him! 

This phonogram also appears in a poem preserved in Atsuta daijingū engi 
(poem 4): 

夜須美志志 yasumisisi Our great lord who rules 

和期意富岐美 wago opokimi in peace, like the sun 

多伽比加流 takapikaru shining high in the sky 

比乃美古 pi no mikwo as an august, rough jewel— 

阿良多麻乃 aratama no and like a rough jewel 


岐閇由久止志乎 kipe yuku tosi wo the year comes and it goes, 

止志比佐爾 tosi pisa ni that year that is so long. 

美古麻知何多爾 mikwo matigata ni We cannot wait for our prince 

都紀加佐禰 tukwi kasane as the months pile up. 

妓美麻知何多爾 kimi matigata ni We cannot wait for our lord: 

宇倍那宇倍那志母夜 ubena ubena simo ya how reasonable it is. 

和何祁勢流 wa ga kyeseru Like the waning moon 

意須比乃宇閇爾 osupi no upe ni that shines through 

阿佐都紀乃其止久 asa tukwi no gotoku the outer robe that I wear, 

都紀多知爾祁流 tukwi tatinikyeru the moon has come up. 

 

碁 


OJ: go OC: *ɡə 

LH: ɡɨə EMC: ɡɨ GO: go, gi KN: ki 

NOM: cời SV: kỳ, kì SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS The Sino-Japanese reading of the graph 
碁 (actually a variant of 棋) clearly derives from Old Chinese, suggesting the 
reading entered Japan rather early, probably because the game of Go was 
introduced to Japan from the continent at an early period. 

The earliest example of this phonogram is found in Kojiki, where it is used 
some 20 times: 淤能碁呂嶋 Onogoro Island (KG), and 丸迩之許碁登臣 
Wani NO Kogoto [NO] OMI (KG). 

KK 75 

多遲比怒迩 tadipinwo ni If I had known I would 

泥牟登斯理勢婆 nemu to siriseba sleep at Tajihi Moor 

多都碁母母 tatugomo mo I would have brought 

母知弖許麻志母能 motite komasi mono a standing sedge mat— 

泥牟登斯理勢婆 nemu to siriseba had I known I were to sleep here. 

This phonogram appears in two poems in Man’yōshū, and in several names 
(or perhaps titles): 碁檀越 Go [NO] Danwoti (MYS 500) and 碁師 Gosi (MYS 
1732). 

MYS 112 

古尓 INISIPYE ni The bird that seems 

戀良武鳥者 KWOPUramu TORI PA to long for bygone days 

霍公鳥 POTOTOGISU is the cuckoo. 

盖哉鳴之 KEDASI YA NAKIsi Perhaps it has sung for 

吾念流碁騰 A GA OMOPEru goto those days, like I long for them. 

 

凝 


OJ: go OC: *ŋəŋ 

LH: ŋɨəŋ EMC: ŋiŋ GO: gou KN: gyou 

NOM: ngâng, ngững SV: ngưng SK: ung 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the LJS, and appears only in Man’yōshū. There are 
four examples of this usage found in the anthology. 

MYS 1130 

神左振 KAMUsaBURU How very sad I am 

磐根己凝敷 IPANE kogoSIKI looking at Mount Mikumari 


三芳野之 MIYOSINWO NO in Miyoshino with its 

水分山乎 MIKUMARI YAMA wo steep and rugged boulders 

見者悲毛 MIREBA KANASI mo that seem god-like. 

 

語 


OJ: go OC: *ŋaʔ or *ŋah 

LH: ŋɨɑʔ or ŋɨɑh EMC: ŋɨa LMC: ŋya GO: go KN: gyo 

NOM: ngỡ, ngữ, ngữa SV: ngữ, ngự SK: e 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, but is limited to Nihon shoki, once in 
the annotational notes and three times in the poetry: 興臺産霊此云許語等武須 
毘 “ ‘The creation spirit of Kogoto,’ this is read kogoto musupi” (NSG). An 
interesting issue here is that the original name appears to be have been phonetic, 
so the necessity of a further gloss as a hint to the pronunciation requires 
explanation. If the two graphs 興臺 are used semantically, then perhaps these 
mean ‘the upraised platform,’ but this is obscure. It is more plausible that the two 
graphs were originally selected for double effect, semantic and phonetic. The 
earlier phonetics of these two phonograms 興臺 in LH are hɨŋ-thə, and this 
represents kongVto. The annotational note was perhaps added to help the reader 
who did not know the earlier reading. 

NSK 37 

彌知能之利 miti no siri I had heard about 

古破儾塢等綿塢 kwopada wotomye wo the maiden from Kohada 

伽未能語等 kamwi no goto in the land behind the road, 

枳虚曳之介廼 kikoyesikado her reputation like thunder, 

阿比摩區羅摩區 apimakura maku but here we lie together. 

 

馭 


OJ: go OC: *ŋah 

LH: ŋîɑ EMC: ŋɨa LMC: ŋya GO: go KN: gyo 

NOM: ngựa SV: ngự SK: e 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, found only once in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 5 

飫企都鄧利 okitu tori Birds of the offing— 

軻茂豆勾志磨爾 kamoduku sima ni ducks gather on the island. 

和我謂禰志 wa ga winesi As long as I live 

伊茂播和素邏珥 imo pa wasurazi I will always remember 

譽能據鄧馭鄧母 yo no kotogoto mo the maiden with whom I slept. 

 

御 


OJ: go OC: *ŋah 

LH: ŋɨɑh EMC: ŋɨa LMC: ŋya GO: go KN: gyo 

NOM: ngự, ngợ SV: ngự SK: e, a 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the CBS. It is only used in Nihon shoki, appearing 
three times in the poetry: 

NSK 95 

婀嗚儞與志 awo ni yosi In the valley of 

乃樂能婆娑摩儞 nara no pasama ni the blue hills of Nara, 


斯々貳暮能 sisizi mono like beasts of prey, he lies 

瀰豆矩陛御暮梨 miduku pyegomori hidden by the banks— 

瀰儺曾々矩 mina sosoku a large catch of tuna, 

思寐能和倶吾嗚 sibi no wakugwo wo the young man, Shibi. 

阿娑理逗那偉能古 asaridunawi no kwo Boars, do not try to find him! 

 

具 


OJ: gu OC: *ɡoh 

LH: ɡuoh EMC: ɡju GO: gu KN: ku 

NOM: cự SV: cự SK: kwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The earliest example appears on a 
mokkan excavated from the Fujiwara Palace (fl. 694–710), dated 694: 甲午年九 
月十二日知田評・阿具比里 “A kinoe year [694] ninth month, twelfth day. 
TiDA Village, Agupi Hamlet…” (MK 162). It also appears twice times in the 
liturgies: 伊賀志夜具波江能如久 ikasiyagupaye no GOTOku ‘as if vibrant and 
thickly flourishing…’ (NT 6). 

This phonogram also appears in Kojiki, where 具 appears 33 times, mostly 
in poetry. Princess Kaguya Hime’s name is written 迦具夜比賣命 (KG). 
Woguna, the childhood name of Yamato Takeru, is 倭男具那命 YAMATO 
WOguna (KG). One representative poem from Kojiki is: 

KK 27 

比佐迦多能 pisakata no Heavenly Mount Kagu 

阿米能迦具夜麻 ame no kaguyama which is unchangeable— 

斗迦麻迩 twokama ni a swan crossing the sky 

佐和多流久毘 sawataru kubi like a sharp sickle; 

比波煩曾 pipaboso soft and delicate 

多和夜賀比那袁 tawayagapina wo like the neck of the swan; 

This phonogram also appears once in the annotational notes, and twice in the 
poetry in Shoki. The annotational note is: 童男此云烏具奈 “ ‘Boy’ is known as 
woguna” (NSG). 

NSK 67: 

波那具波辭 panagupasi What beauty and detail 

佐區羅能梅涅 sakura no mede these cherry blossoms have. 

許等梅涅麼 kotomedeba If beauty is the same 

波椰區波梅涅孺 payaku pa medezu then I should have loved sooner: 

和我梅豆留古羅 wa ga meduru kwora my beloved little maidens. 

This phonogram is fairly popular in Man’yōshū, being the main graph used to 
transcribe Mount Kagu: 香具山 KAgu YAMA. An example of it used to transcribe 
gu in other words appears in the following: 

MYS 82 

浦佐夫流 URAsaburu My melancholy heart 

情佐麻祢之 KOKORO samanesi is filled with countless thoughts. 

久堅乃 PISAKATA no I can see the autumn rain 

天之四具礼能 AME NO sigure no from the distant heavens 

流相見者 NAGAREAPU MIREBA weaving together as it falls. 

 


吾 


OJ: gu OC: *ŋâ 

LH: ŋɑ MC: ŋɔ GO: gu KN: go 

NOM: ngo SV: ngô SK: wo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The earliest example appears in the 
Chikuzen census of 702. It appears in names such as 奈吾佐賣 Nagusamye, 乎 
哿吾良賣 Wokaguramye, 哿吾漏賣 Kagurwomye, and 久吾志 Kugusi. 
Some argue that this phonogram actually transcribes gwo (see below), but it is 
difficult to deny that several of these female names are merely a noun plus the 
female suffix mye: nagusa ‘comfort’ + mye ‘female,’ wo ‘small’ + kagura 
‘sacred music’ + mye ‘female,’ or kagurwo ‘jet black’ + mye ‘female.’ 

 

遇 


OJ: gu OC: *ŋoh 

LH: ŋɨoh EMC: ŋua GO: gu KN: guu 

NOM: ngộ SV: ngộ SK: wu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The phonogram 遇 appears twice in the 
annotational notes, and eight times in Shoki poetry. One example is 香山此云介 
遇夜摩 ‘Mount Kagu is read kaguyama.’ 

NSK 50 

阿佐豆磨能 asaduma no It is good, however, 

避介能烏瑳介烏 pika no wosaka wo to have a companion 

介多那耆珥 katanaki ni when one is sobbing deeply 

瀰致喩區茂能茂 miti yuku mono mo as she walks along Hika Knoll 

多遇譬氐序豫枳 tagupite zo yoki in Asazuma. 

Ōno (1977:381) notes that this phonogram appears mainly in Book 5 of 
Man’yōshū, used as a skillful phonogram in opposition to 具, which is a 
common phonogram, but this is difficult to prove as this phonogram 遇 only 
appears in Man’yōshū once: 

MYS 841 

于遇比須能 ugupisu no Precisely when I hear 

於登企久奈倍尓 oto kiku nape ni the sound of the bush warbler 

烏梅能波奈 ume no pana I can see the plum blossoms 

和企弊能曽能尓 wagipye no sono ni in the garden 

佐伎弖知流美由 sakite tiru miyu of my home scattering. 

 

娯 


OJ: gu OC: *ŋwa 

LH: ŋyɑ > ŋuɔ EMC: ŋua LMC: ŋya GO: gu KN: go 

NOM: ngu SV: ngụ, ngu SK: wu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It only is found between the pages of 
Shoki, twice in the same poem, NSK 75. 

NSK 75 

飫裒枳瀰簸 opokimi pa The great lord 

賊據嗚枳舸斯題 soko wo kikasite overhears these words, 

柁磨々枳能 tamamaki no takes his jeweled 

阿娯羅儞陀々伺 agura ni tatasi dais and sits upon it. 


施都魔枳能 situmaki no He takes the dais 

阿娯羅儞陀々伺 agura ni tatasi of cloth and sits upon it. 

The one word repeated twice here is 阿娯羅儞陁陁伺 agura ni tatasi 
“sitting upon a dais.” Some read ‘dais’ as agwora, based on the Kan-on reading, 
but the problem is that the only known example of agwora is in this poem, 
meaning it is either a hapax, or 娯 is meant to transcribe gu. Following Occam’s 
Razor, I leave it as /gu/. 

 

求 


OJ: gu OC: *ɡu 

LH: ɡu EMC: ɡuw GO: gu KN: kyuu 

NOM: càu, cầu SV: cầu SK: kwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It only appears in Man’yōshū, and then 
only twice in MYS 3430. The single example is MYS 3430: 

斯太能宇良乎 sida no ura wo The boats that ply the bay 

阿佐許求布禰波 asa kogu pune pa of Shida in the morning— 

与志奈之爾 yosi nasi ni are they rowing 

許求良米可母与 kogurame kamo yo there without a reason? 

余志許佐流良米 yosi kosarurame Surely they have a reason. 

 

隅 


OJ: gu OC: *ŋo 

LH: ŋɨo EMC: ŋua GO: gu KN: guu 

NOM: ngu SV: ngu, ngung SK: wu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram appears only in 
Man’yōshū, and then only once in the following poem: 

MYS 837 

波流能努尓 paru no nwo ni In the springtime fields 

奈久夜汙隅比須 naku ya ugupisu the bush warbler is singing. 

奈都氣牟得 natukemu to The plum tree 

和何弊能曽能尓 wa ga pye no sono ni in my garden is in full bloom, 

汙米何波奈佐久 ume ga pana saku trying to tame the bird. 

 

愚 


OJ: gu OC: *ŋo 

LH: ŋɨo EMC: ŋua GO: gu KN: guu 

NOM: ngu SV: ngu SK: wu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears twice in annotational notes 
and twice in poetry in Shoki: 蠛此云摩愚那岐 “ ‘Gnat’ is called magunaki” 
(NSG). 

NSK 56 

菟怒瑳破赴 tunwosapapu Covered in vines 

以破能臂謎餓 ipa no pimye ga Iwa Hime carelessly 

飫朋呂伽珥 oporoka ni does not consider 

枳許瑳怒 kikosanu it to be important— 

于羅遇破能紀 uragupa no kwi the beautiful mulberry branch. 

豫屢麻志士枳 yorumasiziki It cannot approach, 


箇破能區莽愚莽 kapa no kumaguma driven here and there 

豫呂朋譬喩玖伽茂 yoropopi yuku kamo by the bends in the river. 

于羅愚破能紀 uragupa no kwi The beautiful mulberry branch. 

 

虞 


OJ: gu OC: *ŋwa 

LH: ŋyɑ EMC: ŋua LMC: ŋya GO: gu KN: gu 

NOM: NA SV: ngu SK: wu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. Like 娯 noted below, this phonogram 
only appears in Shoki, and the reading is a matter of some debate. Compared with 
the phonogram 娯 above, which has the Kan-on reading of /go/, one would 
expect that this would also be the same. For the time being, I place it in the LJS, 
with its reading of GO gu. 

This phonogram appears four times in the poetry. 

NSK 113 

耶麻鵝播爾 yamagapa ni There are two mandarin ducks 

烏志賦頴都威底 wosi putatu wite at the mountain stream, 

陀虞毘預倶 tagupi yoku paired off so nicely. 

陀虞陛屢伊慕乎 tagupyeru imo wo Who has taken my beloved 

多例柯威爾雞武 tare ka winikyemu who paired off so well with me? 

 

群 


OJ: guri OC: *ɡun < *ɡur§ 

LH: ɡun EMC: ɡun GO: gumu KN: kun 

NOM: quần, quằn SV: quần SK: kun 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and as described under ku for the same 
graph, the only way to explain examples like 平群 pyeguri is to rely on data 
from Old Chinese. Baxter and Sagart (2014:261–262) demonstrate that the graph 
鮮 is OC *sar-, and reconstruct 群 also with a final liquid, which the early 
Japanese (taught by their Paekche teachers?) used to transcribe ri. That the 
ancient scribes knew this is also found in a fragment from Yamashiro fudoki: 雙 
栗社、風土記 南群社 “Namiguri Shrine. Fudoki makes this Namiguri 
Shrine.” The current texts have 郡, but this is a mistake for 群. 

 

疑 


OJ: gwi OC: *ŋə 

LH: ŋɨə EMC: ŋjɨ GO: gi KN: gi 

NOM: ngờ, nghi SV: nghi SK: uy, ung, ul, ek 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It is interesting to note that there are no 
known examples of gwi or even gi in the Paekche orthographic pool or the Suiko 
era corpus. But this goes along with what has been said earlier, that a voiceless 
phonogram also often doubled as a prenasalized one. 

This is the only phonogram used for gwi in Kojiki, and it appears nine times. 
Ōno (1962:617) notes that some people claim 疑 in Kojiki represents a voiceless 
kwi, but he refutes this. The Chinese phonology (with initial ŋ-) supports this 
interpretation for a prenasalized initial. The problem is how to interpret the 
stanza in KK 4 阿佐阿米能・疑理迩多多牟叙 asa ame no kwiri ni tatamu zo 


“I will be standing here when the mists, like morning rain, come.” Again the 
polyphonic principal is the simplest answer. 

Examples in Kojiki include 泥疑 negwi ‘be kind to,’ and one in a poem: 

KK 25 

迩比婆理 nipibari How many nights have we slept 

都久波袁須疑弖 tukuba wo sugwite since we passed through 

伊久用加泥都流爾 ikuywo ka neturu ni Niibari and Tsukuba? 

The phonogram 疑 appears in Nihon Shoki four times in the poetry: 

NSK 31 

阿布瀰能瀰 apumi no mi We captured at Uji 

齋多能和多利珥 seta no watari ni the birds diving for food 

介豆區苔利 kaduku tori at Seta Ferry 

多那伽瀰須疑氐 tanakami sugwite on the Sea of Afumi 

于泥珥等邏倍菟 uzi ni torabetu when we passed over Tanakami. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū roughly 50 times. 

MYS 817 

烏梅能波奈 ume no pana The green willow 

佐吉多流儈能々 sakitaru sono no in the garden where 

阿遠也疑波 awoyagwi pa the plum is in bloom 

可豆良尓須倍久 kadura ni subeku has filled out so well 

奈利尓家良受夜 narinikyerazu ya that you could adorn you hair. 

 

宜 


OJ: gwi OC: *ŋai 

LH: ŋɨɑi EMC: ŋia GO: gi KN: gi 

NOM: NA SV: nghi SK: uy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. One of the earliest datings is around 685, 
since it appears in the 10th chapter of Kujiki, and the era of Tenmu is the latest 
recorded entry: 加宜国造, the governor of Kagwi Province. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū a total of 11 times: 

MYS 826 

有知奈毘久 utinabiku Bending supplely 

波流能也奈宜等 paru no yanagwi to the spring willow and 

和我夜度能 wa ga yadwo no and the blossoms of 

烏梅能波奈等遠 ume no pana to wo the plum in my garden— 

伊可尓可和可武 ika ni ka wakamu how can I single out the better? 

See this phonogram under OJ ge for a fuller treatment. 

 

義 


OJ: gwi OC: *ŋaih 

LH: ŋɨɑih EMC: ŋia GO: gi KN: gi 

NOM: nghĩa, nghì SV: nghĩa SK: uy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in the Suiko corpus once, but 
scholars are divided on the true reading of the graph. Some believe it should be 
read ge instead of gwi. Based on the Later Han reading, it should be read ge 
(which see). This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū: 


MYS 4477 

由布義理尓 yupugwiri ni Has the road to Saho 

知杼里乃奈吉志 tidori no nakisi where the plover called out 

佐保治乎婆 sapodi woba in the evening fog been left 

安良之也之弖牟 arasi ya sitemu to fall into decay, without my 

美流与之乎奈美 miru yosi wo nami even seeing it (you)? 

 

擬 


OJ: gwi OC: *ŋəʔ 

LH: ŋɨəʔ EMC: nɨʔ LMC: ŋi GO: gi KN: gi 

NOM: nghĩ SV: nghĩ SK: uy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears only in Nihon shoki, 
appearing twice in the annotational notes, and nine times in poetry: 榲、此云須 
擬 “ ‘cedar’ is read sugwi” (NSG). 

NSK 94 

伊須能箇瀰 isu no kami We passed through 

賦屢嗚須擬底 puru wo sugwite Furu of Isunokami. 

擧慕摩矩羅 komo makura We passed by the valley 

柁箇播志須擬 takapasi sugwi of Takahashi of straw pillows. 

慕能娑播儞 monosapa ni We walked through 

於裒野該須擬 opoyake sugwi Ōyake where many things are. 

播屢比 parupi We went by Kasuga, 

箇須我嗚須擬 kasuga wo sugwi written ‘spring-day.’ 

逗摩御慕屢 tumagomoru We traveled through 

嗚佐裒嗚須擬 wosapo wo sugwi Osaho, the hidden wife. 

拕摩該儞播 tamake nipa On the jeweled ritual plate 

伊比佐倍母理 ipi sape mori we piled rice high. 

拕摩慕比儞 tamamopi ni The jeweled ritual cup 

瀰逗佐倍母理 midu sape mori we filled with water. 

儺岐曾裒遲喩倶謀 nakisopoti yuku mo On goes the procession, 

柯㝵比謎阿婆例 kage pimye apare weeping and wet; poor 

 Kagehime. 

 

吾 


OJ: gwo OC: *ŋâ 

LH: ŋɑ > ŋɔ EMC: ŋɔ GO: gu KN: go 

NOM: ngo SV: ngô SK: wo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. There is one example in the Wei zhi 
toponyms: 為吾 *we-gɔ. Likely because of the semantics, 吾 is the first person 
pronoun, this graph was generally avoided. 

This phonogram is used once in the annotational notes, and twice in the 
poetry of Nihon shoki: 齊、此云牟吾閉 “ ‘[the name] Mugohe’ is read 
mugwope” (NSG). 

NSK 98 

比攞哿駄喩 pirakata yu Heading up through 

輔曳輔枳能朋樓 puye puki noboru the port of Hirakata 

阿符美能野 apumi no ya someone plays a flute. 


愷那能倭倶吾伊 kena no wakugwo i It is young Kena of Afumi, 

輔曳符枳能朋樓 puye puki noboru playing as he rows upstream. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, but there is some disagreement 
about whether it transcribes gwo or gu: 

MYS 3564 

古須氣呂乃 kwosugero no Like the wind that blows over 

宇良布久可是能 ura puku kaze no the tips of the tiny sedge leaves, 

安騰須酒香 ado susu KA why would I ponder 

可奈之家兒呂乎 kanasikye KWOro wo over and over about 

於毛比須吾左牟 omopisugwosamu my beloved girl? 

My translation follows several interpretations from Vovin (2012:249–250). 

 

胡 


OJ: gwo, kwo OC: * ɡâ 

LH: ɡɑ > ɡɔ EMC: ɣɔ LMC: xɦuə GO: go KN: ko 

NOM: hò, hồ SV: hồ SK: hwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This phonogram appears in Shoki 
roughly ten times. Three examples, one from the Paekche records, one from 
Nintoku, and the other from the record of Jitō, illustrate the usage of this graph: 
百済本記云、遣召烏胡跛臣。蓋是的臣也。“Paekche pongi says, ‘Ugwopa 
Omi was summoned.’ Perhaps this is Ikupa Omi” (NSG). The resemblance of 
these two names is indeed striking, and the second syllable, gwo > ku, is highly 
likely. The second example is: 播磨佐伯直阿俄能胡 Parima sapeki ATAPI 
aganokwo (NSG). This same name is also found in Parima fudoki as 阿我乃古 
Aganokwo, providing proof that the reading was a voiceless velar: /kwo/. 

The last example is a place name, 阿胡行宮 akwo [NO] KARIMIYA “the 
temporary palace of Akwo.” Ienaga et al. (1986:2.514) wish to read this ago, but 
one line later is the name of a person from this area, with the surname (title) 阿 
古志 akwosi, which the NKBT editors note is 未詳 “of unclear meaning.” It 
seems highly likely that this name is related to the place name Akwo. 

It thus seems fairly clear that when found in the Paekche quotes, the 
prenasalized version gwo is earlier, and the use by the Shoki scribes is generally 
based on LMC. The prenasalized version continued into the early Nara era. The 
earliest datable example of this phonogram is from the 731 tax register of the 
province of Izumo, in names such as 賣胡賣 Myegwomye and 加胡賣 
Kagwomye. 

Kojiki uses this phonogram exclusively for gwo, but it is only used three 
times in the record: 亞亞志夜胡志夜 / 阿阿志夜胡志夜 ee siyagwo siya / aa 
siyagwo siya ‘Ah ha! You sucker!’ (KG). 

KK 110 

意布袁余志 opuwo yosi Harpooning tuna, 

斯毘都久阿麻余 sibi tuku ama yo the great fish that are good— 

斯賀阿禮婆 si ga areba when she gets away 

宇良胡本斯祁牟 uragwopwosikyemu you will hunger for her, 

志毘都久志毘 sibi tuku sibi Master Shibi who harpoons tuna. 

This phonogram is also used three times in the poetry of Shoki, read /kwo/. 
Below are two examples. 


NSK 18 

瀰磨紀 mimakwi Woe is Mimaki 

異利寐胡播揶 iribikwo paya Iribiko! 

飫廼餓烏塢 ono ga wo wo Occupying himself 

志齊務苔 sisemu to with a princess, 

農殊末句志羅珥 nusumaku sirani unaware that someone is 

比賣那素寐殊望 pimye na swobi su mo waiting to take his life. 

NSK 42 

知破椰臂苔 tipaya pito Endowed with power 

于旎能和多利珥 udi no watari ni you potent people 

佐烏刀利珥 sawo twori ni who hold the staff. 

破揶鷄務臂苔辭 payakyemu pito si at the ferry of Uji— 

和餓毛胡珥虚務 wa ga mwokwo ni komu come rescue me, companions! 

As both clearly show, this must be read kwo. There is no reason to read the 
name Mimaki Iribigwo, especially as Kojiki, which is very particular about its 
character usage, transcribes his name as 御真木入日子 MIMAKWI IRIBIKWO. 
Also, the word in NSK 42 mwokwo ‘companion’ is mentioned in Shinsen jikyō 
with the attending reading of 毛古 mokwo. 

There are only two examples of this phonogram representing gwo in Nihon 
shoki, which must be an earlier usage, attesting to the eclectic nature of Shoki: 
陽胡史 Yagwo PUBITO (NSG) and 阿胡行宮 Agwo Temporary Palace (NSG). 

This is one of the primary phonograms in Man’yōshū to represent gwo, used 
24 times. 

MYS 12 

吾欲之 WA GA PORIsi You have shown me 

野嶋波見世追 NWOSIMA pa MIsetu the Island of No I desired to see. 

底深伎 SOKO PUKAki But you have not found 

阿胡根能浦乃 agwoNE no URA no the pearl on the deep sea bottom 

珠曽不拾 TAMA so PIRIPANU of the bay of Agone. 

 

候 


OJ: gwo OC: *ɡô 

LH: ɡo EMC: ɣəw GO: go KN: kou 

NOM: hầu SV: hầu, hậu SK: wo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The earliest datable appearance of this 
usage appears on a wooden document (mokkan) excavated from the ruins in 
Nara: 陽候黒須 Yagwo KURWOsu (MK 12594). Another example appears on a 
wooden document dated 天平八年八月二日付 ‘second day of the eighth month 
of the eighth year of Tenpyō (736).’ That name is 陽侯吉足 Yagwo KITITARI 
(MK 4513). Shōsōin also contains a number of Nara era documents which 
contain this phonogram, all examples transcribing the surname yagwo 楊候・陽 
候・揚候. 

Aside from this surname, this phonogram is mainly used to transcribe 
toponyms. For example, Shoku Nihongi records the place name Kimigwo 
variously as 吉彌候 or 吉美候. 

 


後 


OJ: gwo OC: * ɡôʔ or *ɦôʔ 

LH: ɡoʔ or ɣoʔ EMC: ɣəw GO: go KN: kou 

NOM: hậu SV: hậu SK: wo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The earliest datable example appears in 
the Atago District, Yamashiro Province tax record of 733, in the name 宇麻後賣 
Umagwomye. This phonogram also appears in Shoku Nihongi in the name 波多 
牟後閇 Pata Mugwope (700.10.15). This phonogram is used once in Man’yōshū 
in the toponym 阿後尼原 agwone [NO] PARA ‘the plain of Agwone’ (MYS 
3236). 

 

虞 


OJ: gwo OC: *ŋwa 

LH: ŋyɑ EMC: ŋua GO: go KN: gu 

NOM: NA SV: ngu SK: wu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 24 

空蝉之 UTUSEMI NO An empty shell, 

命乎惜美 INOTI wo WOSImi grudingly holding on to life 

浪尓所濕 NAMI ni NURE wet from the waves 

伊良虞能嶋之 iragwo no SIMA NO I cut gemweed from 

玉藻苅食 TAMAMO KARIPAMU Irago Island and eat it. 

 

誤 


OJ: gwo OC: *ŋwâh 

LH: ŋuɑh > ŋuoh EMC: ŋɔ LMC: ŋuə GO: go KN: go 

NOM: ngộ SV: ngộ SK: wo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, appearing once in the annotational 
notes and six times in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 魁師此云比登誤廼伽瀰 
“ ‘The chief bandit’ is called pitogwo no kami” (NSG). 

NSK 8 

伽牟伽筮能 kamukaze no On the large boulder 

伊齊能于瀰能 ise no umi no by the sea of Ise, 

於費異之珥夜 opoisi niya swept by violent winds— 

異波臂茂等倍屢 ipapimotoporu the sea snails crawl about: 

之多儾瀰能 sitadami no the perwinkle. 

之多儾瀰能 sitadami no And like those sea snails, 

阿誤豫 agwo yo you, my troops! 

阿誤豫 agwo yo You, my sons! 

之多太瀰能 sitadami no Like the periwinkle, 

異波比茂等倍離 ipapimotopori we will encircle them, 

于智弖之夜莽務 utitesiyamamu utterly destroying them! 

于智弖之夜莽務 utitesiyamamu Destroying the enemy! 

 

呉 


OJ: gwo OC: *ŋwâ 

LH: ŋuɑ > ŋuɔ EMC: ŋɔ GO: gu KN: go 

NOM: ngo SV: ngô SK: wo 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. A few examples appear in Nihon shoki 
and Man’yōshū. The single example in Nihon shoki appears in the poetry. 

NSK 105 

于泥備椰摩 unebwi yama Though the trees 

虚多智于須家苔 kotati usukyedo are sparse on Mount Unebi, 

多能彌介茂 tanomi kamo is it the young Ketsu 

氣菟能和區呉能 ketu no wakugwo no who has hidden himself there 

虚茂羅勢利祁牟 komoraserikyemu hoping for support? 

This phonogram is used often in Man’yōshū to transcribe the toponym nagwo 
no URA ‘the bay of Nago’ (奈呉乃浦) or nagwo no UMI ‘the sea of Nago’ (奈呉 
能海). 

 

悟 


OJ: gwo OC: *ŋâh 

LH: ŋɑh > ŋɔ EMC: ŋɔ LMC: ŋuə GO: go KN: go 

NOM: ngộ SV: ngộ SK: wo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in Shoki only once, in the 
final poem in the work. 

NSK 128 

阿箇悟馬能 akagwoma no The red horse hesitates 

以喩企波々箇屢 wiuki pabakaru to move toward 

麻矩儒播羅 makuzupara the true vine field. 

奈爾能都底擧騰 nani no tutekoto Why send a message when you 

多頴尼之曳鶏武 tada nisi yekyemu can just say it directly? 

 

娯 


OJ: gwo OC: *ŋwa 

LH: ŋyɑ > ŋuɔ EMC: ŋua LMC: ŋya GO: go KN: go 

NOM: ngu SV: ngụ, ngu SK: wu 

Usage / History: 

See this under OJ gu. 

 

下 


OJ: gye OC: *ɡrâʔ 

LH: ɡaʔ EMC: ɣɛ: GO: ge KN: ka 

NOM: hạ SV: há, hạ SK: ha 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the LJS. One of the oldest extant examples of 
representing gye with 下 is in Kojiki, where it appears once. People since the 
days of Arisaka Hideyo have denied that this phonogram was used to write /gye/. 
That single example appears near the beginning of the book: 久羅下那州多陀用 
幣流之時 kuragye nasu tadaywopyeru “drifting like a jellyfish” (KG). Here 
‘jellyfish’ is correctly written kuragye. The first datable document containing 下 
is the Mino Census of 702, where the toponym mugyetu is represented either as 
牟下津 or 牟下都. 

 


牙 


OJ: gye OC: *ŋrâ 

LH: ŋa EMC: ŋɛ: GO: ge KN: ga 

NOM: nha, ngà SV: nha SK: a 

Usage / History: 

This graph also belongs to the LJS. The phonogram 牙 is found in Kojiki, 
used in the poetry for /gye/, but only once: 

KK 21 

宇泥備夜麻 unebwi yama Mount Unebi— 

比流波久毛登韋 piru pa kumwo towi daytime clouds float along. 

由布佐禮婆 yupu sareba When evening comes 

加是布加牟登曾 kaze pukamu to so the winds are about to blow; 

許能波佐夜牙流 ko no pa sayagyeru the leaves of the trees are rustling. 

This phonogram appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3489 

安豆左由美 adusayumi I left my beloved standing 

欲良能夜麻邊能 ywora no yamapye no among the overgrown brush 

之牙可久尓 sigyekaku ni near Mount Yora 

伊毛呂乎多弖天 imoro wo tatete of the catalpa bow. 

左祢度波良布母 sanedwo parapu mo I am clearing our sleeping place. 

 

介 


OJ: gye OC: *krê(t)s 

LH: kɛs EMC: kɛ:j GO: ke KN: kai 

NOM: giới SV: giới SK: kay, kal 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It clearly transcribes kye, but there are 
two poems in Man’yōshū (MYS 4106 and 4116), where the reader, using the 
polyphonic principal, infers that the graph in question represents gye, not kye. 
Both poems contain the word nagyeku ‘to lament.’ The first example is 
represented as 奈介可須 nagyekasu ‘lamenting’ (MYS 4106), and the other is 
奈介伎都々 nagyeki tutu ‘while lamenting’ (MYS 4116). It should be said that 
both examples show a lack of knowledge of the proper usage, as the verb should 
be nageku. 

 

雅 


OJ: gye OC: *ŋrâʔ 

LH: ŋaʔ EMC: ŋɛ: GO: ga KN: ge 

NOM: nhá, nhã SV: nhã, nha SK: a 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It only appears in Man’yōshū three 
times. The following poem has this graph twice. 

MYS 3875: 

琴酒乎 KOTOSAKE wo Notably pulled apart 

押垂小野従 OSITARE WONWO YU the water gushing 

出流水 IDURU MIDU from the moor of Oshitare 

奴流久波不出 nuruku pa IDEZU does not come out warm. 

寒水之 SAMU MIDU NO The person I think of 

心毛計夜尓 KOKORO mo keya ni with this heart strong 

所念 OMOPOYURU like cold water, 


音之少寸 OTO NO SUKUNAKI will I not meet him on the road 

道尓相奴鴨 MITI ni APANU KAMO with few signs of people? 

少寸四 SUKUNAKI YO If I meet him on the road 

道尓相佐婆 MITI ni APAsaba with few signs of people 

伊呂雅世流 irogyeseru then I would suggest 

菅笠小笠 SUGAKASA WOGASA that we trade 

吾宇奈雅流 WA GA unagyeru my small hat of sedge 

珠乃七條 TAMA no NANATUWO that is so colorful 

取替毛 TORIKAPE mo and the seven strands of 

将申物乎 MAWOSAMU MONO wo jewels hung around my neck— 

少寸 SUKUNAKI if we were to meet on the road 

道尓相奴鴨 MITI ni APAnu KAMO with few signs of people. 

 

夏 


OJ: gye OC: *ɡrâʔ 

LH: ɡaʔ EMC: ɣɛ: GO: ge KN: ka 

NOM: hạ SV: hạ SK: ha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Man’yōshū three times. 

MYS 872 

夜麻能奈等 yama no na to Wanting to hand down 

伊賓都夏等可母 ipitugye to kamo the name of this mountain— 

佐用比賣何 saywopimye ga could it be that Princess Sayo 

許能野麻能閇仁 kono yama no pe ni is on the mountain top 

必例遠布利家牟 pire wo purikyemu waving her scarf? 

 

霓 


OJ: gye OC: *ŋê or *ŋêt 

LH: ŋe or ŋet EMC: ŋɛj LMC: ŋjiaj GO: gei KN: gei 

NOM: nghi, mống SV: nghê SK: yey, yek 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This phonogram appears once in Shoki: 
聞喧擾之響焉此云左揶霓利奈離 “ ‘We hear that [the land] is reverberating 
with commotion’ is read sayagyeri nari” (NSG). 

 

 

 

H 

 

 

For phonograms traditionally listed under ha-gyō (はひふへほ) see the 
respective readings under p-, i.e. pa, pi, pu, etc. 


I 

 

 

伊 



OJ: i OC: *ʔi 

LH: ʔi EMC: ʔji GO: i KN: i 

NOM: y SV: y SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. The oldest known examples occur in 
Wei zhi in the Wa toponyms 伊都 *i-tɔ and 伊邪 *i-ya, the official title 伊支 
馬 *i-ke-ma, and the personal name 伊聲耆 *i-se-gə. 

This graph also appears on the Silla inscription of 536 (second year of bing 
chen) where the name of an envoy, 只珍巴伊即刀 *ki-təl-pa-i-tsik-tɔ, is 
recorded. Also the quotes from Paekche records in Shoki use 伊 a total of 164 
times, with examples such as: personal names 伊羅麻酒 Iramasu and 伊企儺 
Ikina. 

The oldest extant example within Japan appears on the Eta Funayama 
tumulus sword, where the name 伊太加 *i-da-ka is recorded as the name of the 
swordsmith. 

This phonogram also appears in the earliest extant corpus of Japanese texts. 
In the Jōgūki fragment we find 伊自牟良君 Izimura KIMI and 伊久牟尼利比 
古大王 Great King Ikumuneri Pikwo. Also in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu we find 
a poem supposedly written after Shōtoku Taishi’s wife, Kashiwade Otōji passed 
away. 

伊我留我乃 ikaruga no In Ikaruga springs water from 

止美能井乃美豆 tomi no WI no midu the fountain of Tomi. 

伊加奈久尓 ikanakuni If I had known she could not 

多義弖麻之母乃 tagete masimono live without that water, 

止美乃井能美豆 tomi no WI no midu I would have let her drink some. 

This phonogram appears in the liturgies: 香取坐伊波比主命 KATORI NI 
IMASU ipapi NUSI [NO] MIKOTO ‘and the deity Iwahi Nushi no Mikoto who 
resides in Katori…’ (NT 2). 

This is the primary graph to transcribe i in Kojiki: 伊都久 ituku ‘sacredly,’ 
伊自牟國造 izimu KUNI [NO] MIYATUKWO ‘governors of Ijimu Province’ (KG), 
and 伊呂勢 irose ‘uterine brothers’ (KG). 

KK 31 

伊能知能 inoti no You people who return 

麻多祁牟比登波 matakyemu pito pa without losing your lives, 

多多美許母 tatami komo take a leaf from the bear-like 

幣具理能夜麻能 pyeguri no yama no oak tree on Mount Heguri 

久麻加志賀波袁 kumakasi ga pa wo of many folds 

宇受爾佐勢曾能古 uzu ni sase sono kwo and adorn your hair with it. 

This is also the principal phonogram in Nihon shoki to transcribe i, used in 
annotational notes like 言屋、此云伊浮瑘 “ ‘the name say-roof’ is read ipuya” 
(NSG). 


NSK 19 

飫朋佐介珥 oposaka ni If people were to 

菟藝廼煩例屢 tuginoboreru pass down hand to hand 

伊辭務邏塢 isimura wo all the boulders that 

多誤辭珥固佐縻 tagwosi ni kwosaba make up Mount Ōsaka 

固辭介氐務介茂 kwosikatemu kamo perhaps it could be moved. 

This is the standard graph used to transcribe i in Man’yōshū, where it is used 
909 times. 

MYS 14 

高山与 KAGUYAMA TO From the plains of Inamikuni 

耳梨山与 MIMINASHI YAMA TO a great deity arose and came 

相之時 APISI TOKI to watch when Mount Kagu 

立見尓来之 TATITE MIniKOsi and Mount Miminashi 

伊奈美國波良 inamiKUNI para squared off to fight. 

The abbreviated form of this phonogram became katakana イ. 

 

夷 


OJ: i OC: *l(ə)i 

LH: ji EMC: ji GO: i KN: i 

NOM: dì, di, dai SV: di SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It means ‘barbarian,’ and was originally 
applied by the Zhou Chinese to non-Han tribes. It was later used by the Chinese 
for the barbarians located to the east of their court, including the ancient Wa. The 
phonogram appears in the quotes found in Nihon shoki of material from Paekche: 
安羅次旱岐夷呑奚 I-ton-Kei, a prince of Alla; 多羅下旱岐夷他 I-ta, a prince 
of Lower Tala. 

The phonogram also appears in several other works, but mainly in place 
names. Phonologically, this phonogram appears to have come into Japan after the 
Paekche tutors first introduced Chinese to the Wa. Ōno (1962:52) makes a fitting 
statement, “It is interesting that after the Suiko era this phonogram is almost 
completely limited to the representation of toponyms.” 

The two examples from the Suiko era corpus are both place names: 夷与村 
iyo MURA ‘Iyo Village,’ and 夷波礼 ipare ‘Iware.’ This phonogram also 
appears in Man’yōshū in the toponym 記夷城 Kwi-i Fortress (MYS 1472). 

 

移 


OJ: i OC: *lai 

LH: jɑi EMC: jiă LMC: ji GO: i KN: i 

NOM: dời, dây, dê SV: di, dị SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS, as originally pointed out by Kinoshita 
(1964). It is important to note, however, that this phonogram was used to 
transcribe two different sounds, i and ya. Coblin (1994:212) notes that 
transcriptions in the Dharmakṣema (Chinese name 曇無讖) use 移 to transcribe 
-ya-, -ye-, and -yi-. It seems clear that the reading of ya is the older (see 移 
under ya). The syllable i derives from Early Middle Chinese or perhaps Late 
Middle Chinese (ji). That explains why the use of this graph to transcribe i 
mainly appears in Man’yōshū, but not frequently enough to have been considered 


worthy of consideration by Lange 1973. The phonogram 移 appears in the 
following Man’yōshū poem: 

MYS 3353 

阿良多麻能 aratama no I left you standing there 

伎倍乃波也之尓 kibe no payasi ni in the grove of Kibe 

奈乎多弖天 na wo tatete in Aratama, 

由伎可都麻思自 yukikatumasizi but I cannot leave yet. 

移乎佐伎太多尼 i wo sakidatane Let’s go to sleep first. 

 

已 


OJ: i OC: *ləʔ 

LH: jəʔ EMC: jɨ > ji GO: i KN: i 

NOM: dĩ SV: dĩ SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only in Man’yōshū and then 
only in Book 20, where it is used seven times. 

MYS 4337 

美豆等利乃 midutori no Water birds take to flight— 

多知能已蘇岐尓 tati no iswogi ni in a rush to get ready to leave 

父母尓 TITI PAPA ni I departed without saying 

毛能波須價尓弖 mono pazukyenite a word to father and mother. 

已麻叙久夜志伎 ima zo kuyasiki I now regret that. 

 

異 


OJ: i OC: *ləkh 

LH: jəh EMC: jɨ > ji LMC: ji GO: i KN: i 

NOM: dị SV: dị SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS and appears in a newer strata of 
orthographic usage in Japanese, confined mainly to Nihon shoki, and parts of 
Man’yōshū. To be specific, Shoki uses this phonogram twice in annotational 
notes and 18 times in the poetry: 郎姫此云、異羅菟咩 “ ‘paternal daughter’ is 
read iratumye” (NSG), and 壓乞此云、異提 “ ‘Come on!’ is read ide” (NSG). 

NSK 40 

阿波旎辭摩 apadisima The isle of Awaji 

異椰敷多那羅弭 iya puta narabi truly lies next to Azuki Island. 

阿豆枳辭摩 adukisima The isle of Azuki 

異椰敷多那羅弭 iya puta narabi truly lies next to Awaji— 

豫呂辭枳辭摩之魔 yoroskiki sima sima such wonderful islands. 

儾伽多佐例阿羅智之 taka tasare aratisi Who is taking my consort? 

吉備那流伊慕塢 kibwi naru imo wo I had just become intimate 

阿比瀰菟流慕能 apimituru mono with that maiden from Kibi. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, but it is quite rare, appearing 
only twice. 

MYS 2991 

眉隠 MAYWOGOMORI hiding in their cocoons, 

馬聲蜂音石花蜘蟵荒鹿 IBUSEKU MO ARU KA I am surrounded by gloom, 

異母二不相而 imo ni APAZUSITE because I cannot see you. 

 


以 


OJ: i OC: *ləʔ 

LOC: diw EMC: jɨ LMC: ji GO: i KN: i 

NOM: dĩ SV: dĩ SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to CBS. This phonogram is mainly found in Shoki, 
three times in annotational notes, and 14 times in the poetry: 灼然此云、以耶知 
擧 “ ‘manifest’ is read iyatiko” (NSG). 

NSK 128 

阿箇悟馬能 akagwoma no The red horse hestitates 

以喩企波々箇屢 iyuki pabakaru to move toward 

麻矩儒播羅 makuzupara the true vine field. 

奈爾能都底擧騰 nani no tute koto Why send a message when you 

多頴尼之曳鶏武 tadanisiyekyemu can just say it directly? 

This graph also appears in Man’yōshū, but it is limited to eight occurrences 
in Book 20. 

MYS 4386 

和加々都乃 wa ga kadu no Like the forever five willows 

以都母等夜奈枳 itu moto yanagwi that stand by our gate, 

以都母以都母 itumo itumo my mother will always, forever, 

於母加古比須須 omo ga kwopisusu long for me even as 

奈理麻之都之母 narimasi tusi mo she goes about her work. 

The cursive form of this phonogram is the basis for kana い. 

 

怡 


OJ: i OC: *lə 

LH: jə EMC: jɨ LMC: ji GO: i KN: i 

NOM: di SV: di SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs, I believe, to the CBS, judging by the Late Middle 
Chinese reading. It appears four times in Nihon shoki, all in the record of Jinmu: 
厳瓮此云、怡途背 “ ‘sacred jar’ is read itupe” (NSG), 顕斎此云、于図詩怡 
破毘, “ ‘celebrate the divine immanence’ is read utusi ipapi” (NSG). 

 

易 


OJ: i OC: *lekh or *lek 

LH: jeh or jek EMC, LMC: jia, jiajk GO: i, yaku KN: i, eki 

NOM: dịch, diệc, dễ SV: dị, dịch SK: i, yek 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears in Nihon shoki. This 
phonogram appears only twice in song. 

NSK 12 

哆々奈梅弖 tatanamete With our shields arrayed 

伊那瑳能椰摩能 inasa no yama no we have fought many battles 

虚能莽由毛 ko no mayu mo on Mount Inasa, 

易喩耆摩毛羅毘 iyuki mamworapi going through the trees 

多々介陪麼 tatakapeba and watching the enemy. 

和例破椰隈怒 ware pa ya wenu Thus are we famished. 

之摩途等利 simatutori Birds of the island— 


宇介譬餓等茂 ukapi ga tomo come now to our rescue, 

伊莽輸開珥虚禰 ima suke ni kone you friends of the cormorants. 

 

射 


OJ: i OC: *m-lak or *m-lakh 

LH: źak, źah EMC: jiajk, jia GO: yaku, ya, zia KN: eki, ya, sia 

NOM: xạ SV: xạ SK: sya, syek, ya 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, calling to mind the infinitive of the OJ verb iru ‘shoot.’ 
This graph appears mainly in Man’yōshū and Harima fudoki. The single example 
from Harima fudoki is in the place name 射和 iwa. Man’yōshū contains many 
examples. 

MYS 939 

奥浪 OKITUNAMI As the waves of the offing 

邊波安美 pyeNAMI SIDUKYEmi and the waves by the shore 

射去為登 IZARI SU to have quieted down, 

藤江乃浦尓 PUDIYE no URA ni boats are making waves as they 

船曽動流 PUNE so SAWAKYEru head out to Fujie Bay to fish. 

 

五 


OJ: i OC: *ŋâʔ 

LH: ŋɑʔ EMC: ŋɔ GO: go KN: go 

NOM: ngũ SV: ngô,ngũ SK: wo 

Usage / History: 

This is a very popular kungana, suggesting to the reader the OJ word i ‘five’ 
in a compound like ipo ‘five hundred’ or just i ‘fifty.’ The earliest datable 
examples are from the Taihō Census: 五百智 IPOti, 五百麻呂 IPO Maro, or 
五百江賣 IPOYEmye. This graph (or compound) is also found in Kojiki, in 
names like 五百木之入日子命 IPOKWI NO IRIBIKWO [NO] MIKOTO, and 五 
十日帯日子 IKA TARASIBIKWO. There are also many examples of this usage in 
Nihon shoki: 五百城入彦皇子 Prince IPOKWI IRIBIKWO (NSG), 五十猛神 
the deity ITAKYERU (NSG), and 五十鈴姫 Princess ISUZU (NSG). 

 

膽 


OJ: i OC: *tâmʔ 

LH: tɑmʔ EMC: tam GO: tamu KN: tamu 

NOM: đảm SV: đảm SK: tam 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, suggesting to the reader OJ i ‘gallbladder.’ This usage 
appears in Nihon shoki a number of times, in names such as: 婀娜國膽殖屯倉 
ana [NO] KUNI INIWE [NO] MIYAKE ‘the granary of Iniwe in Ana’ (NSG), 膽年 
部屯倉 ITOSIBYE [NO] MIYAKE ‘the granary of Itoshibe’ (NSG), and 膽津 Itu 
(NSG). 

 

馬聲 



OJ: i OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: NA GO: NA KN: NA 

NOM: NA SV: NA SK: NA 

Usage / History: 

This is a graphic game, where the Chinese semantics are the hint to the 
reading. Here the Chinese 馬聲 ‘horse-voice’ suggests to the reader OJ i ‘neigh,’ 


which is the sound a horse makes according to ancient Japanese. This usage is 
peculiar to Man’yōshū, appearing once: 

MYS 2991 

眉隠 MAYWOGOMORI hiding in their cocoons, 

馬聲蜂音石花蜘蟵荒鹿 IBUSEKU MO ARU KA I am surrounded by gloom, 

異母二不相而 imo ni APAZUSITE because I cannot see you. 

 

因 


OJ: ina OC: *ʔin 

LH: ʔin EMC: ʔjin GO: imu KN: imu 

NOM: nhân SV: nhân SK: in 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears on the Ibukibe epitaph (710): 
因幡國 Inaba Province. Shōsōin documents also preserve the usage 因佐 
Inasa. While Hokekyō ongi has several cases of this phonogram glossed as imu, 
it is also plausible that the reading was inu. 

 

印 


OJ: ini, i OC: *ʔins 

LH: ʔinh EMC: ʔjin GO: i, imu KN: in 

NOM: ấn, in SV: ấn SK: in 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram also belongs to the PBS. It appears as ini in certain words. 
This phonogram appears in Shoki, appearing in the Kinmei record six times, 
mainly used to transcribe two names: 印奇臣 iga-OMI, 印支彌 ikimi. This 
phonogram also appears on several mokkan: 播磨国印南郡 Parima Province 
Inami District (unnumbered tablet). 

This phonogram was later used in Kojiki as well as Man’yōshū. Kojiki uses 
this phonogram to write ini, such as the name 印色之入日子 inisiki [NO] 
IRIBIKWO (KG). This phonogram is used in Hitachi fudoki to transcribe the 
toponym 印波 Inipa. In Harima fudoki this graph is used to transcribe 印南 
Inami. 

By the time of Man’yōshū this phonogram was primarily used to transcribe i. 

MYS 1178 

印南野者 inamiNWO PA It seems that we have 

徃過奴良之 YUKISUGWInurasi gone through Inami Field. 

天傳 AMADUTAPU At Hikasa Bay 

日笠浦 PIKASA NO URA the sun crossing the sky 

波立見 NAMI TATERI MIYU we can see the waves rising. 

 

揖 


OJ: ipi, ipu OC: *tsəp or *tsrəp 

LH: tsip EMC: ʔjip GO: ifu KN: ifu 

NOM: ấp, ập, ắp SV: ấp, tập SK: up, cup 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This graph appears in Harima fudoki in 
the toponym 揖保郡 Ipipo District. In the Shōsōin documents there is also the 
toponym 美濃國武義郡揖可郷 Minwo Province Muge District Ipuka Village. 

 


壹 


OJ: iti, i OC: *ʔit 

LH: ʔit EMC: ʔjit GO: iti KN: itu 

NOM: nhất SV: nhất SK: il 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It has been used ever since the third 
century to represent the name 壹岐嶋 Iki Island. An example also appears on 
the Silla Musulo stele (578): 壹兮氻村 *it-gey-lək Village. In Kojiki this graph 
appears in the following names: 壹比韋臣 Itipiwi OMI (KG) and 壹師君 Itisi 
KIMI (KG). All examples of this usage in Nihon shoki are either for 壹岐 Iki 
Island or 壹伎 Iki, the name of an individual. 

In Man’yōshū this graph is used in the toponym Iki. In poetry this graph 
appears once. 

MYS 2480 

路邊 MITI NO pye NO Like the Ichishi flower blooming 

壹師花 itisi NO PANA NO along the side of the road 

灼然 ITISIRWOKU in all its splendor. 

人皆知 PITO MINA SIRINU Everyone now knows 

我戀孋 A GA KWOPWIDUMA PA about the woman I long for. 

 

 


K 

 

 

加 



OJ: ka OC: *krâi 

LH: kai EMC: kaɨ GO: ka KN: ka 

NOM: gia SV: gia SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in the title of a governmental 
rank at the court of Koguryŏ: 古雛加 *kɔ-dzo-ka. This graph also appears on 
the Kwangkaytho stele: 掃加城 *səw-ka Fortress, 加太羅谷 *ka-ta-ra Valley, 
加羅 *ka-ra ‘land of Kara’ 

This graph also appears on the Eta Funayama tumulus sword inscription (伊 
太加 *Idaka), though the third phonogram is damaged. If the dating still seems 
insecure, the phonogram 加 also appears on the Inariyama tumulus sword five 
times, all used in personal names. The most intriguing of the five is the name of 
the king, 獲加多支鹵大王. This appears to represent Great King Waka Takero. 

This phonogram appears in a number of names preserved in Paekche 
materials quoted by the Nihon shoki editors: 都加 Tuka and 百濟加須利君 
Kasuri KIMI of Paekche. 

This phonogram appears in the Suiko-era inscriptions: 須加弖古女王 
Princess Sukatekwo, and 止余美気加志支夜比売天皇 Great King Toyo Mike 
Kasikiya Pimye (later known as Suiko). The graph also appears in a song 
supposedly written by Shōtoku Taishi for his wife Ōtoji who had passed away: 

伊我留我乃 ikaruga no In Ikaruga springs water from 

止美能井乃美豆 tomi no WI no midu the fountain of Tomi. 

伊加奈久尓 ikanakuni If I had known she could not 

多義弖麻之母乃 tagete masimono live without that water, 

止美乃井能美豆 tomi no WI no midu I would have let her drink some. 

This phonogram appears in the liturgies: 牖乃錯比(古語云伎加比)動鳴事 
無久 MADO no KIKApi (KOGO NI kikapi TO IPU) UGOKI NARU KOTO NAku “Let 
there be no movement and creaking from the windows meshing together (which 
in the old vernacular is called kikapi)…” (NT 8). This phonogram appears on 
numerous mokkan: 道守奈加麻呂 TIMORI Nakamaro (MK 446), 玉尓有皮手 
尓麻伎母知而伊□・□□皮伊加尓加 TAMA ni ARU pa TE ni makimotiTE 
iX…XX pa ikani ka… “As for what is on the jewels, wrap them around your 
wrist…why…?” (MKK 10:90). 

This phonogram is also popular in Kojiki: 加邪 kaya ‘thatch (but also a 
general designation for a variety of plants)’ (KG), and 宇士多加禮許呂呂岐弖 
udi takare kororokite ‘‘maggots had gathered and were squirming about” (KG). 

KK 59 

夜麻斯呂迩 yamasiro ni Mount Bird in Yamshiro, 

伊斯祁登理夜麻 isike tori yama go after her! 

伊斯祁伊斯祁 isike isike After her! After her! 

阿賀波斯豆麻迩 a ga pasiduma ni Follow my beloved spouse; 

伊斯岐阿波牟加母 isiki apamu kamo catch up and meet her, will you! 


This phonogram appears sparingly in Nihon shoki, five times in annotational 
notes and once in the poetry: 岐神、此云布那斗能加微 “ ‘the deity of the fork 
in the road’ is read punatwo no kamwi” (NSG). 

NSK 72 

於朋摩幣 opomapye Everyone! 

烏摩幣輸區泥餓 womapye sukune ga Gather together under 

訶那杜加礙 kanatwokage the eaves of the iron gate 

訶區多智豫羅泥 kaku tatiyorane of Ōmae and Womae. 

阿梅多知夜梅牟 ame tatiyamemu The rain will soon abate. 

This is not the primary phonogram in Man’yōshū to transcribe ka, but it is 
still used fairly frequently, appearing 384 times (compared with 可 1528 times). 

MYS 39 

山川毛 YAMA KAPA mo Even the mountains and rivers 

因而奉流 YORITE TUKAPUru come and offer obeisance 

神長柄 KAMUNAGARA to the divine will. 

多藝津河内尓 tagiTU KAPUTI ni How the boat of the divine ruler 

船出為加母 PUNADE SESU kamo sets out into the violent waters. 

The kana form か is a cursive derivative of 加. Naturally, scholars see the 
left half as the origin of the katakana form カ. 

 

居 


OJ: ka OC: *kaʔ or *kah 

LH: kɨɑ(h) EMC: kɨə GO: ko KN: kio 

NOM: cư SV: cư SK: ke, kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram, used to transcribe ka, belongs to the WS. There is a helpful 
hint in the work of Zheng Xuan (127–200 CE), where he often gives 
phonological clues to how some phonograms are pronounced in provincial places. 
Regarding this graph, he writes 居讀爲姫姓之姫、齊魯之間語助也 “居 is 
read like 姫, the one that is a surname. It is a helping word used in the area 
between Qi and Lu.” Sino-Xenic helps us unravel this description. The GO for 
姫 is ki, and SK is kuy. What is of greater value is SV which has cơ, phonetically 
[kəə] which is quite close to [kɑ]. Thus it is reasonably certain that by the time of 
Wei zhi that 居 still reflected ka. This usage appears in the Koguryŏ section of 
Wei zhi where it notes that one of the names of the Koguryŏ royalty is 優居 
*ʔu-kɨɑ. 

Using this same information, a look at the name 多沙鬼獲居 carved on the 
blade of the Inariyama tumulus sword, a name often interpreted as tasakwi wake, 
is quite interesting. Considering the dating of the inscription (fifth or sixth 
century CE), this usage is closer to Later Han than EMC. As Miyake has 
theorized, this is a name, tasakwi waka, or Waka of the Tasa Fortress (p.c.). This 
inscription also has two other important names: 乎獲居 wowaka ‘small waka,’ 
and 弖巳加利獲居 teyokariwaka Teyokari Waka. It is possible that this waka 
means ‘young one.’ 

This phonogram also appears on the Kwangkaytho stele: 男居城 *nam-ka 
fortress. This graph probably was reintroduced into the Japanese orthographic 
pool in the late sixth century or early seventh with its newer reading of ke. The 
reading of ko is even later (see 居 under ke and ko). 


迦 


OJ: ka OC: NA 

LH: ka EMC: kɨa, kaɨ GO: kia KN: ka, kia 

NOM: ca, già, dà SV: ca, dà SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram also belongs to the PBS. It appears in the Paekche 
inscription from a bronze inscription on a Paekche statue of Buddha. The graph 
in question appears in the famous representation of Sakamuni 釈迦, *śakka. The 
inscription dates from a Kinoe Saru year, which is most likely 624. The same 
transcription appears on several mokkan (MKK 5:72, MKK 14:68, MKK 30:89). 

The oldest datable example of 迦 in Japan is found on the burial inscription 
of Prince Funa Obito, dated 668, writing ‘Asuka Palace’ as 阿須迦宮 and calls 
the great king who ruled from that palace 阿須迦天皇 Great King Asuka. 

This phonogram is quite prevalent in Kojiki: 火之 迦具土 神 PO NO 
KaguTUTI [NO] KAMWI ‘the deity of fire’ (KG), 訓金云迦那 “ ‘metal’ is read 
kana” (KG), and 玉緒母由良迩取由良迦志而 TAMA [NO] WO mo yura ni 
TORIyurakasiTE ‘...took the string of jewels and gave it to her making the jewels 
sound’ (KG). 

KK 54 

夜麻賀多迩 yamagata ni How delightful it is 

麻祁流阿袁那母 makeru awona mo to pick together even 

岐備比登登 kibwi pito to the greens that were planted 

等母迩斯都米婆 tomo ni si tumeba in the mountain fields, 

多怒斯久母阿流迦 tanwosiku mo aru ka with that person from Kibi. 

This phonogram is used but once in Shoki, in an annotational note: 御刀此 
云彌波迦志, “ ‘august sword’ is read mipakasi” (NSG). 

This phonogram appears in Man’yōshū, but only in Books 5 and 20. It is 
used once to transcribe Sakamuni 釈迦, *śakka. It is used in the poetry 25 times. 
The following poem uses this phonogram six times. 

MYS 800 

父母乎 TITI PAPA wo You feel admiration 

美礼婆多布斗斯 mireba taputwosi seeing your father and mother. 

妻子見礼婆 MYEKWO MIreba You feel love and affection 

米具斯宇都久志 megusi utukusi seeing your wife and children. 

余能奈迦波 yo no naka pa As for society 

加久叙許等和理 kaku zo kotowari this is only natural. 

母智騰利乃 motidori no Like a bird caught in birdlime 

可可良波志母与 kakarapasi mo yo it is difficult to get out, as we 

由久弊斯良祢婆 yukupye siraneba do not know where to go. 

宇既具都遠 ukegutu wo And like one who takes off 

奴伎都流其等久 nukituru gotoku shoes with holes in them 

布美奴伎提 puminukite people who step on 

由久智布比等波 yuku tipu pito pa and walk away from family 

伊波紀欲利 ipakwi ywori are perhaps ones who 

奈利提志比等迦 nari desi pito ka are born of boulders or trees. 

奈何名能良佐祢 na ga NA norasane Tell me your name! 

阿米弊由迦婆 ame pye yukaba If you go toward heaven 

奈何麻尓麻尓 na ga mani mani you can do as you please. 


都智奈良婆 tuti naraba If you are on the earth 

大王伊摩周 OPOKIMI imasu then there is a great ruler. 

許能提羅周 kono terasu Below the sun and moon 

日月能斯多波 PITUKWI no sita pa which sheds light here 

阿麻久毛能 amakumwo no to the ends of where 

牟迦夫周伎波美 mukabusu kipami the clouds of the sky are, 

多尓具久能 taniguku no to the ends of the place 

佐和多流伎波美 sawataru kipami where the toad dwells, 

企許斯遠周 kikosi wosu this is the superior land 

久尓能麻保良叙 kuni no mapora zo that our sovereign rules over. 

可尓迦久尓 kanikaku ni Certainly it is not a place 

保志伎麻尓麻尓 posiki mani mani where one can do this or that 

斯可尓波阿羅慈迦 sika ni arazi ka as his heart desires. 

 

奇 


OJ: ka OC: *kai 

LH: kɨɑi EMC: kiə GO: ki KN: ki 

NOM: cả, cơ, kÿ SV: cơ, kÿ SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram, used to transcribe ka, appears in quotes from peninsular 
records found in Nihon shoki, and in the earliest fragments of the Suiko era 
corpus. On this evidence, I place this graph in the PBS. 

In the third year of Kenzō appears the following name of a man from 
Mimana 那奇他甲背, glossed as nakata kapupai. It appears that the same name 
is also found in the record of Kinmei, this time written as 那干陀甲背, 
illustrating that the second phonogram was indeed read ka. In the record of 
Kinmei we see the name of a Paekche official of Japanese descent: 物部施徳麻 
奇牟 MONONOBYE Makamu of the eighth rank. Later this same official appears, 
but his name is written as 物部莫奇武 MONONOBYE Makkamu. 

There is also the following example from the Suiko corpus: 止与彌挙奇斯 
岐移比彌, which writes the name of Empress Suiko: toyo mike kasikiya pimye. 
This graph is later used to represent OJ kwi (which see). 

 

可 


OJ: ka OC: *khaiʔ 

LH: khɑiʔ EMC: kha GO: ka KN: ka 

NOM: khả, khá SV: khả SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This graph was generally avoided, 
because of its grammatical function in classical Chinese: ‘can, permissible,’ but 
this is still important evidence for its use as a phonogram preserved in Paekche 
materials quoted by Nihon shoki: 為 歌可君 Wikaka [NO] KIMI. If this 
orthography is based on Later Han, then these graphs would be read *wɨoi-kɑkhɑ, 
so this theoretically could represent waka-ka KIMI ‘Lord young-buck.’ 

Two examples of this phonogram also appear in Jōgū shōtoku hōō teisetsu. 
One of these examples is a name, while the other comes from the poetry: 甲可王 
Prince Kapuka and 佐可留木 sakaruKWI an unknown variety of tree. Dating the 
name, Prince Kapuka, is difficult. Jōgūki writes the name as 加布加王 Prince 
Kapuka, and while the graphs do not match, the phonology does. If this was 


written 甲可皇子, then we could date the name from around the era of Tenmu or 
Jitō, when the Chinese appellations of 皇子 ‘Prince’ began to be used. This is 
not the case, and so I believe this name and its usage can be dated from the Suiko 
era. 

This phonogram appears six times in the liturgies: 御殿。古語云阿良可 
“Palace, which in the ancient vernacular was araka…” (NT 8). This phonogram 
also appears on a number of excavated wooden tablets: 紀伊国海部郡可太郷 
Kii Province Ama District Kada Village (MK 428), 卜部可麻手 URABYE 
KamaDE (MK 1309). 

This phonogram is used sparingly in Kojiki and Nihon shoki. This graph 
appears once in Kojiki, in a song: 

KK 42 

伊知比韋能 itipiwi no The earth of 

和迩佐能迩袁 wani sa no ni wo Wani Hill in Ichii 

波都迩波 patu ni pa is of a reddish tint 

波陀阿可良氣美 pada akarakemi on the upper layer, 

志波迩波 sipa ni pa while the lower layer 

迩具漏岐由惠 nigurwoki yuwe is a reddish black. 

The phonogram 可 also appears in Nihon shoki in four annotational notes 
and one poem: 泉津平坂、此云余母都比羅佐可 “ ‘the level hill of Yomi’ is 
read yomotu pirasaka” (NSG). 

NSK 110 

烏智可頴能 wotikata no The pheasants in the sparse field 

阿娑努能枳々始 asanwo no kigisi off in the distance 

騰余謀佐儒 toyomosazu are making noise— 

倭例播禰始柯騰 ware pa nesikado we have slept without a sound, 

比騰曾騰余謀須 pito so toyomosu how people are making a fuss? 

This phonogram is the primary graph to transcribe ka in Man’yōshū, used 
1528 times in the anthology. 

MYS 793 

余能奈可波 yo no naka pa When one comes to 

牟奈之伎母乃等 munasiki mono to the actual realization that 

志流等伎子 siru toki si the world is a vain thing 

伊与余麻須万須 iyoyo masu masu then one’s sadness 

加奈之可利家理 kanasikarikyeri deepens all the more. 

This phonogram appears nine times in the Bussoku stele poetic sequence. 

BSS 5 

伊可奈留夜 ika naru ya What kind of person 

比止尓伊麻世可 pito ni imase ka was this, who steps on rock 

伊波乃宇閇乎 ipa no upe wo as if it were dirt 

都知止布美奈志 tuti to puminasi and formed a print 

阿止乃祁留良牟 ato nokyeruramu that has remained? 

多布刀久毛阿留可 taputwoku mo aru ka How awe-inspiring that is! 

 

訶 


OJ: ka OC: *haj 

LH: hɑi EMC: xa GO: ka KN: ka 

NOM: kha, ha SV: kha, ha, SK: ka, ha 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS, appearing in the Buddhist inscription 
preserved on the Iksan Palace Steel Sutra, 菩薩摩訶 薩 : Bosat Makasat 
‘bodhisattva, the great salvation.’ This comes from Sanskrit ‘bodhisatt(va) maha 
sat.’ 

The graph appears also in Kojiki and Nihon shoki. It appears 31 times in 
Kojiki, 26 times in personal and place names, and five times in regular words, but 
it never appears in the poetry. The cape of Kabura is written 訶夫羅前 kabura 
[NO] MISAKI (KG) There is also the name of a princess, 賦登麻和訶比賣命 
puto mawaka pimye (KG). 

Shoki, on the other hand, uses this phonogram 13 times in the poetry, and 
twice in the annotative notes: 盟神探湯此云区訶陁智, “ ‘trial of allegiance by 
boiling water’ is read kukatati” (NSG). 

NSK 102 

夜酒瀰志斯 yasumi sisi In the heavenly 

和餓於朋耆瀰能 wa ga opokimi no eighty [rays of] sunshine where 

訶勾理摩須 kakurimasu my great lord hides, 

阿摩能椰蘇河礙 ama no yaswokage who rules in peace— 

異泥多々須 idetatasu if you go out and 

瀰蘇羅烏瀰禮麼 miswora wo mireba look at the august sky, 

豫呂豆余珥 yorodu yo ni for ten thousand reigns 

訶勾志茂餓茂 kaku simo gamo may it remain as is, splendid. 

知余珥茂 tiyo ni mo For a thousand reigns 

訶勾志茂餓茂 kaku simo gamo may it remain as is, wonderful. 

訶之胡瀰弖 kasikwomite In reverence 

菟伽倍摩都羅武 tukapematuramu we will serve the throne. 

烏呂餓瀰弖 worogamite Prostrate on the ground 

菟伽倍摩都羅武 tukapematuramu we will serve the throne. 

宇多豆紀摩都流 utadukwimaturu I present this song. 

 

哥 


OJ: ka OC: *kâi 

LH: kɑi EMC: ka GO: ka KN: ka 

NOM: ca, kha SV: ca SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This is based on evidence from Nihon 
shoki, where the compilers have quoted from Paekche materials. The examples of 
哥 from the Paekche corpus preserve this usage in personal and place names. An 
example from the reign of Great King Kinmei is: 百済本記云、為哥岐彌、名 
有非岐, “Paekche pongi says, ‘Wika Kimi’s name is Upwiki.’ ” Shoki records 
his name as 為哥可君, but the Paekche pongi account leaves the name and title 
phonetic. 

It thus is difficult to date the difference between 哥 and 歌, though it is 
clear that 哥 is the older character. Consider another example from Shoki: 高胸 
此云多歌武娜娑歌, “ ‘high breast’ in the vernacular is takamunasaka” (NSG). 
This phonogram also appears in Shoku Nihongi, but primarily to transcribe Kai 
Province: 歌斐 Kapwi. 

 


介 


OJ: ka OC: *krê(t)s 

LH: kɛs EMC: kəɨj > kɛ:j GO: kai, ke KN: kai 

NOM: giới SV: giơi, giới SK: kay, kal 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. This graph appears in the Jōgūki 上宮 
記 fragment, which preserves the name 児麻和加介 “his son was Mawakaka.” 
Notice, however, that the NKBT editors (Ienaga et al. 1986:2.543) have altered 
the order of the phonograms to read 麻加和介, maka wakye. Ōno (1962:110) 
notes, “(This name) as found in the Jōgūki fragments appears to use 介 as ke, 
but this phonogram only appears in Shoki’s poetry and commentary, read as ka, 
and nothing else....It is believed that this phonogram was never used to represent 
ke in the Nara era.” Ōno thus views this use of 介 in Jōgūki as scribal error from 
a later era, but Onoda Mitsuo’s Shintō Taikei text (1986:312) of Shaku Nihongi 
(which contains the aforementioned fragment) shows complete textual unity. 
From the evidence we have, there is little chance this is a later addition or error. 
My major reservation with the reading of wakye is that it appears to be motivated 
by an attempt to relate that with the title wake, but the vowels do not match. 

Scholars must address the text as it is. My contention is that even if the work 
is found to be from an era later than the Suiko era, the source material is clearly 
old enough to be placed in that era. A brief look at the text of Jōgūki quoted in 
Shaku Nihongi will illustrate the importance of this often doubted text (cf. Lurie 
2001:421). Jōgūki contains 138 syllables written phonetically, using a total of 43 
different phonograms. Of these 43, 26 also appear in Mabuchi’s Peninsular 
orthographic pool (1999:701–750), meaning that 60% of the orthography is 
grounded in the ancient Paekche orthography. Interestingly, if we include 
phonograms from peninsular stone inscriptions, then we can add two more (汙 is 
a variant of 于 on the Kwangkaytho stele, and 思 found on the Tanyang stele). 
If we expand this to cover the Suiko era (not including graphs only found in 
Jōgūki), then a total of 37 graphs (86%) are clearly from an older orthographic 
system. The six phonograms not found in the Suiko era orthographical pool are: 
希・介・義・遅・凡・母. Of these six four (介・義・遅・母) are found in 
Nihon shoki. Thus the two problematic graphs are 希・凡. This means that the 
orthography of Jōgūki holds up under scrutiny. I therefore have no qualms 
viewing 介 as a legitimate old phonogram, read, of course, as ka. I do hesitate to 
place this graph in the PBS, so I have hedged and place it in the EJS. Regarding 
the Go-on reading, Hokekyō ongi has one gloss as kai (Ogura 1995.2:1288). The 
phonogram 疥 is glossed many times as ke (1995.2:75–752), though one 
manuscript does gloss this as kai. The same is true for the phonogram 芥 
(1995.2:1016–1020). 

This phonogram appears in Nihon shoki, used seven times in annotational 
notes, and in 18 poems: 香山此云介遇夜摩, “ ‘Mount Kagu’ is read kaguyama” 
(NSG). Clearly 介 is transcribing ka here. 

NSK 19 

飫朋佐介珥 oposaka ni If people were to 

菟藝廼煩例屢 tugi noboreru pass down hand to hand 

伊辭務邏塢 isimura wo all the boulders that 


多誤辭珥固佐縻 tagwosi ni kwosaba make up Mount Ōsaka 

固辭介氐務介茂 kwosikatemu kamo perhaps it could be moved. 

 

歌 


OJ: ka OC: *kâi 

LH: kɑi EMC: ka GO: ka KN: ka 

NOM: ca, cà SV: ca SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

This is a variant form of 哥. See the explanation previous for details. 

 

哿 


OJ: ka OC: *kâiʔ 

LH: kɑiʔ EMC: ka GO: ka KN: ka 

NOM: cả SV: cả SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the LJS. The earliest datable example of this 
phonogram comes from the Chikuzen Census Register of 702, where it appears 
in names like 和哿志 Wakasi, 哿麻賣 Kamamye, and 武哿利賣 Mukarimye. 

This phonogram appears in Shoki, in 11 poems. 

NSK 90 

飫裒枳瀰能 opokimi no Though the great lord 

耶陛能矩瀰哿枳 yapye no kumikaki desires to weave together 

哿々梅騰謀 kakamedomo a multi-layer fence of branches, 

儺鳴阿摩之耳彌 na wo amasizimi you will not weave the branches 

哿々農倶彌柯枳 kakanu kumikaki and there will be no fence. 

This phonogram also appears once in the imperial edicts of Shoku Nihongi, 
that example coming from an edict of Emperor Shōmu, issued in the fourth 
month of 749. The pertinent passage is: 公衆波不成哿登疑 MOROPITO pa 
NARAZI ka to UTAGAPI “and the masses doubt whether the project of construction 
will be completed” (SM 13). 

 

珂 


OJ: ka OC: NA 

LH: khɑi EMC: kha GO: ka KN: ka 

NOM: kha SV: kha SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. Influenced by use of the phonogram 可, 
the graph 珂 was mainly used from the late Asuka period into the Nara. This 
phonogram is sometimes found on wooden tablets (mokkan). On one the 
toponym 伊豆国奈賀郡奈珂郷 Idu Province Naga District Naka Village 
appears (unnumbered tablet). There are also examples of 珂 in place names in 
Shoku Nihongi. For example, 多珂郡 Taka District (718.5.2), 玖珂郡 Kuka 
District (721.4.20), 遠珂郡 Woka District (740.9.24), and 赤 坂 郡珂磨 
AKASAKA District Kama (766.5.23). Hitachi fudoki also records the ancient place 
name of 多珂 Taka. This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, but only in 
one toponym: 那珂郡 Naka District (MYS 813). 

 

箇 


OJ: ka OC: kâih 

LH: kaih EMC: ka GO: ka KN: ka 

NOM: cá, có SV: cá SK: ka, ki 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in Nihon shoki, 15 
examples in the annotational notes, and 28 times in the poetry: 龗、此云於箇美 
“ ‘spirit of the mountains’ is read okami” (NSG). 

NSK 3 

阿磨佐箇屢 amasakaru Having crossed over 

避奈菟謎廼 pinatumye no the narrow, earthly straits, 

以和多邏素西渡 iwatarasu setwo the provincial maidens 

以嗣箇播箇柁輔智 isikapa kataputi stand on the banks of the river 

箇多輔智爾 kataputi ni on the banks of the Ishikawa, 
阿彌播利和柁嗣 ami pariwatasi spreading out their nets. 

妹慮豫嗣爾 mero yosi ni Pull in those nets 

豫嗣豫利據禰 yosi yorikone by pulling on the meshes! 

以嗣箇播箇柁輔智 isikapa kataputi On the banks of the Ishikawa. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, but there are only two examples, 
appearing in MYS 701 and MYS 1716. The example in 701 (何日二箇 IDURE 
[NO] PI ni ka “and on what day?”) appears to be orthographic play, using the 
semantic value of this graph, which on the surface means ‘two days.’ 

MYS 1716 

白那弥乃 SIRAnami no How many years will pass, 

濱松之木乃 PAMAMATU NO KWI no how many reigns will it see, 

手酬草 TAMUKEKUSA the pine tree of sacred offerings 

幾世左右二箇 IKUYO MADE ni ka on the beach where 

年薄經濫 TOSI pa PENUramu white-capped waves crash? 

 

嘉 


OJ: ka OC: *krâi 

LH: kai EMC: kaɨ GO: ke KN: ka 

NOM: gia SV: gia SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

I place this graph in the LJS. This phonogram also appears five times in the 
Hizen fudoki, three times for Saka (modern day Saga) 佐嘉, and twice for Tika 
値嘉. This phonogram also appears sparingly in Shoku Nihongi: 嘉嶋 KaSIMA 
(740.11.3) and 嘉麻郡 Kama Diustrict (770.7.18). Ōno (1977:346) states that 
this graph appears once in Man’yōshū, in MYS 1141: 水尾急嘉, MIWO WO 
PAYAMI ka ‘as the water flows quickly.’ However, recent textual research on 
Man’yōshū notes, “The original text of this second stanza in manuscripts other 
than the Sengaku line have 水尾急. Various manuscripts in the possession of 
Nishihonganji, like the Sengaku-bon, have 嘉 at the end of this stanza, but this 
graph was likely interpolated later according to the reading” (Satake et al. 
1999.2:128–129). 

 

架 


OJ: ka OC: *kak (?) 

LH: kah EMC: kaɨ GO: ka KN: ka 

NOM: giá, gá, dứa SV: dá, giá SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. Its use appears to be a rather late 
development, appearing once in Man’yōshū. 


MYS 1118 

古尓 INISIPYE ni Did the people anciently 

有險人母 ARIkyemu PITO mo come here also 

如吾等架 WA GA GOto ka and like me adorn their hair 

弥和乃桧原尓 miwa no PIBARA ni with sprigs from 

挿頭折兼 KAZASIWORIkyemu Hibara in Miwa? 

This phonogram also appears in Shoku Nihongi in the name 尾張架古刀自 
WOPARI Kakwotwozi (791.7.1). 

 

伽 


OJ: ka OC: NA 

LH: ɡa EMC: ɡɨa LMC: kɦia GO: ga, gaa KN: kia 

NOM: già, nhà SV: già SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

I place this phonogram in the CBS. The Chinese originally used this 
phonogram to transcribe certain Sanskrit sounds into Chinese, those being /ɡa/, 
/ɡā/, /ɡha/, /ɡhā/ (Pulleyblank 1991:253). This phonogram mainly appears in 
Nihon shoki, in eight annotational notes (all in the record of Jinmu) and in 29 
poems: 撫劒、此云都盧耆能多伽彌屠利辭魔屢 “ ‘holding the sword’ is read 
turugi no takami twori sibaru” (NSG). 

NSK 45 

瀰箇始報 mikasipo Filled with reverence 

破利摩波揶摩智 parima payamati Hayamachi of Harima 

以播區娜輸 ipa kudasu will brave danger 

伽之古倶等望 kasikwoku tomo and take care of the maiden 

阿例揶始儺破務 are yasinapamu of the turbulent waters. 

This phonogram also appears in Izumo fudoki: 伽佐伽社 Kasaka Shrine. It 
should be noted that some manuscripts of Izumo fudoki have 加佐加社, but I 
would argue that the more complicated graph is the older. 

 

賀 


OJ: ka OC: * ɡâih 

LH: ɡɑih EMC: ɣa LMC: xɦa GO: ga KN: ka 

NOM: hạ SV: hạ SK: ha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This phonogram and its usage in Old 
Japanese are somewhat problematic, but much of the confusion rests on two, 
possibly three, fundamental issues: i) there are some examples in Kojiki where 
賀 is scribal error for 迦; ii) there is the possibility of mixing of Go-on and Kanon; 
iii) the polyphonic principal. Miller (1975:104–105) believes that the 
phonogram 賀 has but a single reading, ga, and he thus invents anomalous 
words like, Figari 比賀利 ‘light’ (his rendering of pikari). Miller cites an 
analogous example in MYS 3926, where the reader will find 比賀流 ‘shine,’ his 
Figaru. It would be interesting to know how two examples of the same 
orthography prove the reading for ga. It could just as easily be ka, based on Kanon 
or the polyphonic principal. 

It should be noted that it is not impossible that the author of the poem noted 
above actually intended the reading of -ga-, but to expand the issue and give it 
greater weight, a few other examples are called for. Unfortunately, Miller’s 


attitude toward previous scholarship is arrogant: “Wenck studies the employment 
of the Chinese phonogram ho in this passage; but since he takes as a point of 
departure for his argumentation the a priori assumption that the form being 
written was -ka- and not -ga-..., his remarks are of little value. The same is also 
true of Ōno T...” (1975:104–105). 

We must start with Kojiki, as its orthography is highly consistent in making a 
strict distinction between voiceless and prenasalized initials. There are 180 
examples of 賀 transcribing OJ ga, and seven other examples that are 
problematic (but highly likely -ka-), found in Kojiki (cf. Ōno 1962:616). The 
seven problematic examples are all found in poetry, and the releveant 
information is found below: 

1) KK 11 賀美良比登母登 kamira pitomoto “one stem of pungent leeks” 

2) KK 35 蘇良波由賀受 swora pa yukazu “we do not take to the sky” 

3) KK 74 賀岐比久夜 kaki piku ya “Plucking the zither” 

4) KK 74 斗那賀能伊久理爾 twonaka no ikuri ni “on the rocks in the channel” 

5) KK 90 波都瀬能賀波能 patuse no kapa no “the river Hatsuse” 

6) KK 91 夜麻能賀比爾 yama no kapi ni “in the valleys of the mountains” 

7) KK 92 賀志賀母登 kasi ga moto “at the base of the oak tree” 

Of these seven problematic examples, Onoda (1977:514, 566) has corrected 
the graphs in 3, 4, and 7 to 加, based on his thorough textual criticism; his 
corrections are based on evidence that these three likely arose from scribal 
contamination. The other four examples (1, 2, 5, and 6) have no variants in the 
various manuscripts. Onoda’s work illustrates that other examples of 加 exhibit 
variations in the manuscripts with 賀, while 賀 exhibits variation with 加 and 
迦 (cf. Onoda 1977:71–73). It is therefore difficult to completely rule out scribal 
contamination here. As a good example, consider a stanza in KK 43 where five 
of the eight manuscripts of Kojiki have the line 阿賀良袁登賣袁 agara 
wotomye wo, and only three manuscripts have 阿加良袁登賣袁 akara wotomye 
wo ‘the maiden with the flush face.’ 

As noted above, while not all examples can be swept away as scribal error, a 
polyphonic explanation also seems in order. It is also highly possible that when 
Hieda no Are went through the manuscripts and revised the texts, likely in order 
to bring some regulation to what surely was orthographic chaos, that he missed a 
few cases. What follows is an illustrative example: 

KK 10 

意佐賀能 osaka no Though there are many 

意富牟盧夜爾 opomurwoya ni who have come and entered 

比登佐波爾 pito sapa ni the great cavern of Osaka, 

岐伊理袁理 kiiriwori and though many men 

比登佐波爾 pito sapa ni have entered here 

伊理袁理登母 iriwori tomo and are seated before us, 

美都美都斯 mitumitusi you, the intrepid 

久米能古賀 kume no kwo ga sons of the Kume, 

久夫都都伊 kubututui with pommel-head hilts, 

伊斯都都伊母知 isitutui moti holding your stone-hilt swords, 

宇知弖斯夜麻牟 utitesi yamamu will now smite the enemy. 

美都美都斯 mitumitusi You, the intrepid 


久米能古良賀 kume no kwora ga sons of the Kume, 

久夫都都伊 kubututui with pommel-head hilts, 

伊斯都都伊母知 isitutui moti holding your stone-hilt swords, 

伊麻宇多婆余良斯 ima utaba yorosi it is well if you strike now. 

By the time of Nihon shoki, the LMC reading was the foundation for the 
phonogrammatic system, where g > k, but there are still examples in Nihon shoki 
where 賀 is used to represent both ka and ga, again showing both the polyphonic 
principal, as well as the mixture of material included in Nihon shoki without 
editorial standardization of these usages: 伊賀臣 Iga OMI (NSG), 覺賀鳥 
kakuka [NO] TORI ‘the bird with the auspicious cry (another name for the osprey, 
NSG),’ 志賀 toponym Siga (NSG), 玖賀媛 Kuga PIMYE ‘Princess Kuga’ 
(NSG), 蘇 賀 滿 智 宿 禰 Swoga Mati [NO] Sukune (NSG), 膳 臣 賀 拕 夫 
KASIPADE [NO] OMI Katabu (NSG), and 都賀山 Mount Tuga (NSG). 

The trend seen in Nihon shoki, with a mixing of ka and ga readings continues 
in Man’yōshū. Below are two poems, the first with 賀 transcribing ka and the 
other ga. 

MYS 4402 

知波夜布留 tipayapuru Facing the hill of the deity— 

賀美乃美佐賀尓 kami no misaka ni endowed with power— 

奴佐麻都里 nusa maturi I lift paper offerings 

伊波布伊能知波 ipapu inoti pa and pray for the safety of 

意毛知々我多米 omo titi ga tame the lives of mother and father. 

MYS 4404 

奈尓波治乎 nanipadi wo The cord that my beloved 

由伎弖久麻弖等 yukite ku made to attached to my robes 

和藝毛古賀 wagimokwo ga which was to last until I 

都氣之非毛我乎 tukesi pwimwo ga wo returned home from the road 

多延尓氣流可母 tayenikeru kamo to Naniwa has broken in two. 

 

河 


OJ: ka OC: * ɡâi 

LH: ɡɑi EMC: ɣa LMC: xɦa GO: ga KN: ka 

NOM: hà SV: hà SK: ha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. The sole example in Shoki appears in a 
poem. 

NSK 102 

夜酒瀰志斯 yasumi sisi In the heavenly 

和餓於朋耆瀰能 wa ga opokimi no eighty [rays of] sunshine where 

訶勾理摩須 kakurimasu my great lord hides, 

阿摩能椰蘇河礙 ama no yaswokage who rules in peace— 

異泥多々須 idetatasu if you go out and 

瀰蘇羅烏瀰禮麼 miswora wo mireba look at the august sky, 

豫呂豆余珥 yorodu yo ni for ten thousand reigns 

訶勾志茂餓茂 kaku simo gamo may it remain as is, splendid. 

Ōno (1977:320, 346) twice claims there are two poems in Man’yōshū were 
河 transcribes ka, but my search into the text of the anthology shows that every 
instance of 河 transcribes ga (which see). 


舸 


OJ: ka OC: *khâi 

LH: khɑi EMC: ka LMC: ka GO: ka KN: ka 

NOM: NA SV: cả, ca, khả SK: ka, ki 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. There are three examples from 
annotational notes and eight poems with this graph in Shoki: 香賜、此云舸拕夫 
“ ‘the name 香賜’ is read katabu” (NSG). 

NSK 75 

飫裒枳瀰簸 opokimi pa The great lord 

賊據嗚枳舸斯題 soko wo kikasite overhears these words, 

柁磨々枳能 tamamaki no takes his jeweled 

阿娯羅儞陀々伺 agura ni tatasi dais and sits upon it. 

 

柯 


OJ: ka OC: *kâi 

LH: kɑi EMC: ka LMC: ka GO: ka KN: ka 

NOM: NA SV: kha SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in Shoki 15 times in 
annotational notes, and in 21 poems: 俗呼父為柯曾, “ ‘Father’ in the vernacular 
is kaso” (NSG). 

NSK 96 

倭例以梨魔志 ware irimasi I went inside 

阿都圖唎 atwo twori and held her leg, 

都麼怒唎絁底 tumadworisite holding the edge of her hem, 

魔倶囉圖唎 makura twori holding her pillow— 

伊慕我堤嗚 imo ga te wo holding my spouse. 

倭例儞魔柯斯毎 ware ni makasime I wrapped her hand 

倭我堤嗚麼 wa ga te woba around my waist 

伊慕儞魔柯絁毎 imo ni makasime and she my arm— 

麼左棄逗囉 masakwidura wrapped it around her. 

多々企阿藏播梨 tataki azapari And like a vine, 

矢洎矩矢慮 sisikusiro we caressed, intertwined. 

 

軻 


OJ: ka OC: *khâi 

LH: khɑi(h/ʔ) EMC: kha LMC: kha GO: ka KN: ka 

NOM: NA SV: kha SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in two poems in Nihon shoki. 

NSK 6 

阿軻娜磨廼 akadama no The radiant globe 

比訶利播阿利登 pikari pa ari to is wonderfully brilliant, 

比鄧播伊珮耐 pito pa ipyedo so people may say, 

企弭我譽贈比志 kimi ga yosopisi but I have now realized 

多輔妬勾阿利計利 taputwoku arikyeri your brilliance is the finest. 

 


香 


OJ: ka OC: *haŋ 

LH: hɨɑŋ EMC: xɨaŋ GO: kau KN: kiyau 

NOM: hương SV: hương SK: hyang 

Usage / History: 

It is difficult to determine whether this is a phonogram or a kungana. If this 
is a phonogram, then the velar nasal final has been ignored. If this a kungana 
then it calls to mind OJ ka ‘scent.’ A poem in Kojiki bears this out: KK 43, 迦具 
波斯・波那多知婆那波 kagupasi pana tatibana pa “the orange with its lovely 
fragrance.” Here, ka plus gupasi, means ‘wonderful fragrance.’ This was a very 
popular usage, and for convenience sake, I will treat this as a kungana. 

This usage appears in Nihon shoki in a variety of names: 豐香節野尊 
TOYOKABUNWO [NO] MIKOTO (NSG), 草香邑 KUSAKA Village (NSG), and 
觀松彦香殖稻天皇 Great King MIMATU PIKWO KAWESINE (NSG). 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, primarily to transcribe particles 
like ka. 

MYS 3903 

春雨尓 PARUSAME ni Is it the willow that has 

毛延之楊奈疑可 moyesi yanagwi ka budded in the spring rain? 

烏梅乃花 ume no PANA Is it the same willow 

登母尓於久礼奴 tomo ni okurenu that always blossoms 

常乃物能香聞 TUNE no mono KAmo later with the plum blossoms? 

 

髪 


OJ: ka OC: *pat 

LH: puɑt EMC: puat GO: foti KN: fatu 

NOM: NA SV: phát SK: pal 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ ka ‘hair.’ A relatively early example 
of this usage appears in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu: 白 髪 部 王 Prince 
SIRAKABYE. The earliest actually datable example appears in the Mino Census 
of 702: 白髪賣 SIRAKAmye. This graph also appears on the epitaph stone of 
Ishikawa Ason (762): 白髪郷 SIRAKA Village. Almost all examples of this 
graph, in Kojiki, Nihon shoki, and Man’yōshū are variations of siraka ‘white hair,’ 
but it likely calls to mind a variation of siru ‘to rule.’ 

 

蚊 


OJ: ka OC: *mən 

LH: mun EMC: mun GO: mon KN: bun 

NOM: NA SV: văn SK: mwun 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ ka ‘mosquito.’ According to Ōno 
(1977:802) 蚊 appears 11 times in Nihon shoki. All examples appear in personal 
or place names. There are only three examples in Kojiki: 蚊野之別 KANWO NO 
WAKE (KG), and 蚊屋野 KAYANWO (KG). Examples from Shoki include 
toponyms and names like 蚊田 KADA (NSG), 蚊屋采女 KAYA UNEMYE 
(NSG), and 日香蚊父子 PIKAKA KASOKWO (NSG). Interestingly, later in 
Shoki this surname is written 日香香 PIKAKA (NSG). This graph also appears 
in Man’yōshū, some examples apparently selected because of its meaning 
‘mosquito’ with its sound. 


MYS 2642 

燈之 TOMOSIBWI NO Flittering in the light 

陰尓蚊蛾欲布 KAGE ni KAgaywopu of the torches 

虚蝉之 UTUSEMI NO I can see 

妹蛾咲状思 IMWO ga WEMAPIsi the image of the smile of 

面影尓所見 OMOKAGE ni MIYU my beloved of this world. 

 

鹿 


OJ: ka OC: *rok 

LH: lok EMC: ləwk GO: roku KN: roku 

NOM: NA SV: lộc SK: lwok 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ ka ‘deer.’ This word appears to be a 
bound form, as the free form is sika. Consider, however, an example in Shoki, in 
the reign of Ankō, where ‘my deer’ is written 我鹿此云阿柯, aka. I thus believe 
that ka is the original word, and si- was added later. Martin’s (1987:523) 
etymology is much the same: *si[si no] ka. There is a theory that sika means 
male deer, a change from seka, but there are no ancient examples of this word. 
The most encouraging data for this theory comes from Ryūkyūan. In most 
languages in the Ryūkyūs *si and *se have merged, and it is difficult to 
reconstruct proto-forms. Miyako is one of the few islands that preserves reflexes 
of *si (> sï) and *se (> si). In Hirara ‘deer’ is ʃika; however, it is likely that this is 
a loan from the mainland. 

This usage was used early on, appearing once in Teisetsu, in the name 入鹿 
IRUKA. This kungana also appears in Kojiki: 鹿屋野比賣神 the deity 
KAYANWO Pimye (KG), 正鹿山上津見神 the deity MASAKA YAMATUMI 
(KG), and 名謂井氷鹿 NA PA WIPIKA TO IPU ‘My name is Wipika’ (KG). 

The kungana also appears in Nihon shoki. 天鹿兒弓 AMA NO KAGWO YUMI ‘a 
heavenly deer-child bow’ (NSG), 鹿葦津姫 KASITU PIMYE (NSG), and 鹿子 
水門 KAGWO Port (NSG). 

There are 46 examples of this kungana in Man’yōshū, many which appear in 
love poems. 

MYS 733 

空蝉乃 UTUSEMI no Will we pass through 

代也毛二行 YO ya mo PUTAYUKI this empty world twice? 

何為跡鹿 NANI SU TO KA What is to be done? 

妹尓不相而 IMWO ni APAZUTE Am I to sleep alone 

吾獨将宿 A GA PITORI NEMU without meeting my beloved? 

 

芳 


OJ: ka, kagu OC: *phaŋ 

LH: phuɑŋ EMC: phuaŋ GO: fau KN: fau 

NOM: NA SV: phương SK: pang 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ ka ‘fragrant’ (see 香 OJ ka). This 
usage appears solely in Man’yōshū, once as ka (MYS 257), and apparently by 
extension, once as kagu (MYS 1812). 


MYS 257 

天降付 AMORI TUKU Descending from heaven 

天之芳来山 AME NO KAGU YAMA heavenly Mount Kagu— 

MYS 1812 

久方之 PISAKATA NO Far off and distant 

天芳山 AME NO KAGU YAMA on heavenly Mount Kagu 

此夕 KONO YUPUPYE this evening 

霞霏霺 KASUMI TANABIKU mists are spreading out. 

春立下 PARU TATURASI MO It seems that spring is coming. 

 

歟 


OJ: ka OC: *la 

LH: jɑ EMC: jɨa GO: yo KN: yo 

NOM: NA SV: dư, rư SK: ye 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ ka ‘question particle.’ This usage only 
appears in Man’yōshū, and while there are a large number of examples, they all 
seem to be transcribing the question particle ka. 

MYS 70 

倭尓者 YAMATO ni PA Are they coming 

鳴而歟来良武 NAKITE KA KUramu to Yamato as they call out? 

呼兒鳥 YWOBU KWODORI I can hear the calling bird chicks 

象乃中山 KISA no NAKAYAMA as they call out and fly over 

呼曽越奈流 YWOBI so KWOYU naru the mountains of Kisa. 

 

香 


OJ: kago, kagu OC: *haŋ 

LH: hɨɑŋ EMC: xɨaŋ GO: kau KN: kiyau 

NOM: hương SV: hương SK: hyang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The velar nasal final of the graph is used 
to transcribe -gu. This graph is primarily used to transcribe 香山 kagu YAMA 
Mount Kagu, which is prominent in Japan’s mythology. This usage appears in 
Kojiki, Nihon shoki, and Man’yōshū. Kojiki also contains examples of this graph 
used to transcribe kago: 香余理比賣命 Princess Kagoyori Pimye (though some 
manuscripts read this as Kayori), 香坂王 Prince KagoSAKA. 

In Man’yōshū there is some variation with the representation, however. 
Sometimes kagu YAMA is transcribed as 香具山 (MYS 2, 334). Also, kago is 
transcribed as 香胡 (MYS 3420). 

 

各 


OJ: kaku OC: *kâk 

LH: kɑk EMC: kak GO: kaku KN: kaku 

NOM: các, cắc, gác SV: các SK: kak 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The earliest usage of this graph appears 
in the Mino Census of 702, where the following name appears: 各牟郡 
Kakumu District. There are also two cases of this graph appearing in Man’yōshū. 


MYS 3298 

縦恵八師 YOSIWE YAsi Oh, alas 

二々火四吾妹 SINAMU YO WAGIMWO I am going to die, my beloved. 

生友 IKERITOMO Even if I live 

各鑿社吾 kaku NOMWI KOSO A GA shall I continue to love 

戀度七目 KWOPWI WATARINAME as I do now? 

This poem is quite complex, using numbers to suggest ideas to the reader. 
The first stanza includes the number ‘eight’ (八). The second stanza has ‘two’ 
twice 二二, a mathematical symbol of 2×2=4, where ‘four’ is si. Notice that the 
three numbers in stanza two (二二四) equal ‘eight,’ reflecting back to ‘eight’ in 
the first stanza. The final stanza has ‘seven’ (七), which seems to suggest that if 
he dies, the number eight, symbolic of fortune, will decrease by one, and thus be 
unfortunate. 

 

覺 


OJ: kaku OC: *krûk 

LH: kɔk EMC: kaɨwk > koe:wk GO: kaku, keu KN: kaku 

NOM: giác SV: giác, rác SK: kak, kwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears once in Nihon shoki, in the 
record of Keikō: 覺賀鳥 kakuka [NO] TORI ‘the bird with the auspicious cry 
(another name for the osprey, NSG).’ The graph is also found in Man’yōshū, in 
the name in a head note 元興寺之僧獨覺多智 ‘A bonze at Gangōji, named 
Doku Kakutati’ (MYS 1018). Hokekyō ongi preserves both readings of kaku and 
keu (Ogura 1995.2:238–248). 

 

甘 


OJ: kamu OC: *kam 

LH: kɑm EMC: kam GO: kamu KN: kamu 

NOM: cam SV: cam SK: kam 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. There is one example of this usage in 
Nihon shoki, 甘羅村 Kamura Village, in the first part of Tenmu’s record. This 
graph also appears in Shoku Nihongi in toponyms and names like 甘良郡 
Kamura District (711.3.6), 甘南 備 Kamunabwi (740.9.5), and 甘樂 郡 
Kamura District (765.11.1). There are eight examples of this graph in 
Man’yōshū, most of which write kamunabwi (甘南備 [MYS 1125, 1435], or 甘 
嘗備 [3227]). An example of this for just kamu is below. 

MYS 3846 

法師等之 papusiRA GA You must not 

鬚乃剃杭 PIGE no SORI KUPI violently pull on the horse 

馬繋 UMA TUNAGI that is tied up to the stubble 

痛勿引曽 ITAKU NA PIKI so on the chin of the bonze. 

僧半甘 POPUSI pa nAkamu The bonze will likely cry. 

Here 半 (pan) transcribes the topic marker pa, and the graph’s nasal final 
leads into the verb nak-. The graph 甘 then finishes the verb and provides the 
tentative suffix -mu. 

 


含 


OJ: kamu OC: * ɡə̂ m 

LH: ɡəm EMC: ɣəm > ɣam GO: gamu, gomu KN: kamu 

NOM: hàm SV: ham, hàm SK: ham 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Harima fudoki in 含藝里 
Kamugi Village. 

 

敢 


OJ: kamu OC: *kâmʔ 

LH: kɑmʔ EMC: kam GO: kamu KN: kamu 

NOM: cám, cảm, dám SV: cảm SK: kam 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 901 

麁妙能 ARATAPE no I cannot even put 

布衣遠陀尓 NUNO KINU wo dani clothes of coarse cloth 

伎世難尓 kiseGATE ni on my children. 

可久夜歎敢 kaku ya NAGEkamu Do I lament this much as 

世牟周弊遠奈美 semu subye wo nami there is nothing I can do? 

 

干 


OJ: kan, kani OC: *kân 

LH: kɑn EMC: kan GO: kamu KN: kan 

NOM: can, càn, cơn SV: can SK: kan 

Usage / History: 

This phonograms belongs to the PBS. An example of this graph appears in 
the inscription from the Silla Tanyang Silla Cekseng stele (dated before 551 CE). 
In that inscription the ancient royal rank of Kanki is written 干支. According to 
the record in Shoki, Paekche royalty also carried the title of Kanki, though most 
examples are written as 旱岐 kanki. Likely Paekche used the phonogram 干 
also. 

It would appear that the peninsular scribes used 干 to transcribe a velarinitial 
syllable that ended in a nasal. A good example is found in the record of 
Kinmei where a quote from Paekche pongi says, 汝先那干陀甲背 “Your 
forefather, Nakanda Kapubai....” A related name appears later in the record, 那 
奇陀甲背 Nakada Kapubai. If these are one and the same person, then the 
second graph 奇 corresponds to 干. It is possible that the transcription with 干 
was used to represent prenasalization: *nakanota > *nakanta > nakanda. 

This phonogram appears in Man’yōshū twice, and transcribes kani. 

MYS 1298 

干各 kanikaku NI Though people may 

人雖云 PITO PA IPU TOMO say this and that 

織次 ORITUGAMU I continue to weave 

我廿物 WA GA PATAMONO NO my white hempen robes 

白麻衣 SIRWOKI ASAGOROMO that are on my loom. 

Numerous Man’yōshū manuscripts have 千 instead of 干, and 名 instead 
of 各. There is a tradition that Hitomaro may have originally written 云々 SIKA 
ZIKA NI ‘such and such (this and that)’ for the first stanza, which would invalidate 
this example. If such is the case, then consider the following poem: 


MYS 3174 

射去為 IZARI SURU Like the sound of the oars 

海部之檝音 AMA NO KADI NO OTO of the fisherman who fish 

湯按干 YUKURAkani my beloved has 

妹心 IMWO PA KOKORO NI quietly taken over 

乗来鴨 NORINIKYERU KAMO my heart. 

 

閑 


OJ: kana OC: *ɡrên 

LH: ɡɛn EMC: ɣəɨn > ɣɛ:n GO: gemu KN: kan 

NOM: nhàn SV: nhàn SK: han 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. Ōno (1962:490) mentions that there is 
only one example of this graph in the corpus, and it appears in the very first 
poem of Man’yōshū. He presents a robust argument for the stanza 家吉閑・名 
告沙根 IPYE KIkana / NA NORAsane ‘I want to hear about your home / Tell me 
your name.’ Recent textual work has suggested, however, that 吉 is a mistake 
for 告, and 閑 is actually a mistake from a misreading of the calligraphic 
writing of 奈 (奈), so the actual text should be 家告奈・名告沙根 IPYE 
NORAna / NA NORAsane ‘Tell me of your home / Tell me your name’ (cf. Satake 
1999.1:13–14). Because a definitive conclusion has not been reached, I leave this 
phonogram in the dictionary. 

 

漢 


OJ: kani OC: *hâns 

LH: hɑnh EMC: xan GO: kamu KN: kan 

NOM: hán SV: hán SK: han 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. There is one example of this phonogram 
in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2762 

蘆垣之 ASIKAKI NO Like the tender grass 

中之似兒草 NAKA NO NIKWOGUSA inside the reed fence 

尓故余漢 nikwoyoka ni if you smile at me 

我共咲為而 WARE TO WEMASITE so tenderly 

人尓所知名 PITO ni SIRAYU NA people are sure to find out. 

 

甲 


OJ: kapa, kapu OC: *krâp 

LH: kap EMC: kaɨp > kɛ:p GO: kafu KN: kafu 

NOM: giáp, nháp, ráp SV: giáp SK: kap 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The earliest datable example of this 
graph appears in the Chikuzen Census of 702 in the somewhat cyptic name 甲由 
Kapuyu (?). In Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu there is the name 甲可王 Prince 
Kapuka. This name may derive from Mount Kapuka (鹿深山). In the Yōrō 
Census of 721 the name 甲和里 Kapawa Village appears. There are several 
examples of this usage on mokkan, though the actual reading may be debatable: 
甲可石前 Kapuka ISIMAPYE (MKK 3:12), 犬上郡甲良里 INUGAMI 
District Kapura Village (unnumbered tablet). 


This phonogram also appears in Shoku Nihongi, which preserves examples of 
two different readings for this graph: 甲努村 Kapanu Village (709.10.8), 甲賀 
郡 Kapuga District (742.2.5). 

 

合 


OJ: kapi OC: *ɡə̂ p 

LH: ɡəp EMC: ɣap LMC: xɦap GO: gafu KN: kafu 

NOM: hợp, hạp, hấp SV: hợp, hiệp SK: hap 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This usage appears in the Fujiwara 
name 宇合 UMAkapi, a transcription found in a variety of Nara era documents. 

 

韓 


OJ: kara OC: *ɡân < *gˤar§ 

LH: ɡan EMC: ɣan LMC: xɦan GO: gamu KN: kan 

NOM: hàn SV: hàn SK: han 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WZ. It appears in Wei zhi in the toponym 狗 
邪韓 *koʡ-ja-kara. Kojiki contains 韓国 glossed kara kuni ‘land of Kara.’ 
This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki glossed as kara: 乃以蛇韓鋤之劒 
‘(He) took his Kara knife….’ This usage appears a number of times on mokkan: 
韓櫃 kara PITU ‘Kara lidded box’ (unnumbered slat); 韓奈須比 kara nasupi 
‘Kara eggplant’ (MK 2215), and 壬辰年韓鉄 ‘In the Mizunoe Tatsu year (692), 
Kara iron…’ (MK 385). 

 

葛 


OJ: katu OC: *kât 

LH: kɑt EMC: kat GO: kati KN: katu 

NOM: cát SV: cát SK: kal 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. The earliest datable example of this 
graph appears in the Yōrō Census of 721: 葛餝郡 Katusika (or perhaps 
Katosika) District. This graph also appears numerous times in Man’yōshū, in 
forms such as 葛城 or 葛木 and read as katurakwi, so it is better to view this 
usage as a logogram, as 葛 is often read as katura. 

 

考 


OJ: kawa OC: *khûʔ 

LH: khouʔ EMC: khâuʔ GO: kau KN: kau 

NOM: kha SV: kha SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This graph appears once in Nihon shoki 
in 考羅濟 Kawara [NO] WATARI ‘the ferry at Kawara’ (NSG). 

 

居 


OJ: ke OC: *ka 

LH: kɨɑ(h) EMC: kɨə GO: ko KN: kio 

NOM: cư SV: cư SK: ke, kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This phonogram appears on the 
Kwangkaytho stele, in the toponym 男居城 *nəm-kɨɑ fortress. There is also 
what appears to be a Paekche toponym preserved on the same stele, in the phrase: 


南居韓国烟一看烟五 ‘The (people) of *Nəm-kɨɑ in the land Kara (will 
provide) one Guard Captain and five guards.’ It also appears on the Inariyama 
Tumulus sword inscription, in a title following several names: 獲居 wakka. 
Miller and Murayama (1979:424) mention both wake (their wakë) and waka, but 
later backtrack and attempt to relate this to an Altaic word, beg or begi. I would 
rather leave open the possibility that this word is actually waka ‘young’ and the 
title wake < *waka-i may be a later development. 

There are precious few Paekche examples, but one does appear in quotes of 
Paekche material preserved in Nihon shoki. The well known example is from the 
record of Kinmei (Ienaga et al. 1986.2:110–111): 彌移居 miyake ‘royal 
demesne.’ This demesne, according to the record, was in Mimana (任那), a small 
nation-state sandwiched between Silla and Paekche. 

This phonogram also is used in the Suiko era corpus. All three examples of 
ke in the Suiko era corpus are used to write the name of the ruler, Suiko: 等已彌 
居加斯支移比彌乃彌己等 Toyo Mike Kasikiya Pimye no Mikoto. In order to 
explain the difference here between 居 /ke/ and /ko/, consider what Miyake 
(1999:537) notes that /ey/ (my /e/) actually was /əy/, while /o/ is phonologically 
[ə]. Thus, the two vocalic nuclei were close, but one had an off-glide. The graph 
居 appears more commonly in the Japanese corpus to transcribe ko, which fits 
SV and Chữ Nôm cư very well. This is addressed under OJ: ko. 

 

既 


OJ: ke OC: *kəts 

LH: kɨs > kɨj EMC: kɨj GO: ke KN: ki 

NOM: NA SV: ký, kí SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram has one of the most complicated usage histories in the entire 
early writing system used by the Japanese, and ultimately influenced by the 
Paekche system. The graph 既 is used to transcribe Old Japanese [ke], [kwi], 
and [ko]. A full explanation of this phonological evolution will be found under 
既 OJ: kwi. 

This phonogram 既, to transcribe /ke/, belongs to the LJS, and is clearly 
based on EMC. Two examples suffice: 既母 kemo, apparently the name of a 
Korean, and 既多寺 keta DERA Keta Temple (Ōno 1977:104). 

This phonogram is also used six times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 885 

朝露乃 ASA TUYU no Like the morning dew 

既夜須伎我身 keyasuki A GA MWI my body which vanishes easily 

比等國尓 pito KUNI ni how can I perish 

須疑加弖奴可母 sugwikatenu kamo in a foreign land— 

意夜能目遠保利 oya no ME wo pori I want to see my parents. 

 

希 


OJ: ke OC: *həi 

LH: hɨi EMC: xɨj GO: ke KN: ki 

NOM: hơi SV: hi, hy SK: huy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, and it appears three times in the Suiko 
era corpus. These three examples all come from the somewhat controversial 


Jōgūki fragment, and Ōno says (1962:52–53), “For the time being we recognize 
this as the principal phonogram to transcribe type B ke in the Suiko era fragments, 
but since there is only one other example of this phonogram in the extant corpus 
of the Nara era, it is difficult to accept this phonogram as the common or quasicommon 
usage in the Suiko era.” 

Jōgūki no longer survives, known to us through a large fragment quoted in 
Shaku Nihongi, from the 14th century. This fragment contains mainly clearly 
archaic phonetic usages, and most scholars concede that at least the source 
material for the work is from the Suiko era. The graph 希 appears three times in 
this quote, all used in personal names. Those three examples from Jōgūki are: (a) 
凡牟都和希 Pomutu Wake; (b) 児伊波都久和希 “His son, Ipatuku Wake”; (c) 
児伊波智和希 “His son, Ipati Wake.” 

From the Sino-Xenic evidence, one may be tempted to view the graph 希 as 
actually transcribing /kwi/. First, consider all the evidence, lined up below: 

 

Graph OC LH EH EMC SV NOM SK 

希 *həi *hɨi xjei xɨj hi, hy hơi huy 

 

This chart strongly suggests that this graph had a mid vowel, perhaps very 
close to what the early Japanese may have heard as /ə/. This suggests that OJ /ke/ 
was actually [kəi] or something close to this. Miyake (1999:511) reconstructs /iy/ 
(my /wi/) as [*ɨ], and he (1999:537) reconstructs /ey/ (my /e/) as [*əy]. His 
results were conducted independently of the evidence I have provided above. 
Furthermore, the graph 希 is not in Miyake’s data base. 

This phonogram also appears in the name 多希麻呂 Takemaro, a name 
preserved in a document from Shōsōin of the Nara era. 

 

擧 


OJ: ke OC: *kaʔ 

LH: kɨɑʔ EMC: kɨə GO: ko KN: kio 

NOM: cử, cỡ SV: cử SK: ke 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. This graph is usually read ko, so its 
usage here may seem a bit mystifying. Ōno (1962:53) bafflingly notes, “It is 
beyond belief that this graph’s use has any relation to the phonology of Chinese 
or Korean.” It seems more plausible to believe that this graph was transmitted to 
the Japan through Sino-Paekche with an off-glide. Miyake (2003a:228) has 
argued that ke in OJ may have been [kəy]. 

One example appears on the inscription from Gangōji Temple, where the 
name of Suiko is transcribed as 止与彌擧奇斯岐移比彌, Toyo Mike Kasikiya 
Pimye. 

 

氣 


OJ: ke OC: *kə(t)s 

LH: kɨs > kɨj EMC: khɨj GO: ke KN: ki 

NOM: khí SV: khí SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The graph 氣 was one of the most 
popular graphs used to transcribe OJ /ke/, and it appears in almost every kind of 


record or inscription in Japan from the Suiko era on. The oldest extant example 
from the Suiko era corpus is found in a name recorded in Jōgūki: 伊波己里和氣 
Ipakori Wake. This phonogram also appears in the liturgies: 大海爾舟満都都気 
弖。自陸往道者荷緒縛堅弖磐根木根履佐久彌弖。馬爪至留限。長道無間 
久立都都気弖 OPOUMI ni PUNE MITEtudukete, KUGA YWORIYUKU MITI PA NI [NO] 
WO YUPIKATAMEte, IPANE KINE PUMIsakumite, UMA [NO] TUME [NO] 
ITARITODOMARU KAGIRI, NAGAMITI MA NAKU TATEtudukete “And continue to fill 
the great ocean with ships, while on the paths on land the ropes that hold tribute 
will be tightened in all areas, and the couriers will stamp through the rocks and 
the roots of trees, with horses continuing to stand without gap along the long 
road, their hooves reaching every spot…” (NT 1). This phonogram appears a 
number of times on excavated tablets: 春部気万呂 PARUBYE Kemaro (MK 
11424), 伊与国和気郡 Iyo Province Wake District (MKK 12:13). 

This graph also appears in Kojiki: 訓別云和氣 ‘The graph 別 is to be read 
wake’ (KG). 宇氣布時 ukepu TOKI “when the pledge is made…” (KG). This 
phonogram also appears in names like 豐宇氣毘賣 TOYO Ukebimye, 大氣都 
比 賣 OPOketu Pimye (KG), and 氣多 Keta (KG). According to Ōno 
(1977:174) 氣 appears 26 times in Kojiki’s poetry. 

KK 67 

多迦由久夜 taka yuku ya It is for the outer garment of 

波夜夫佐和氣能 payabusa wake no Prince Hayabusa Wake 

美淤須比賀泥 miosupigane who flies so high. 

There are eight examples of this phonogram in Nihon shoki, with four in the 
annotational notes, and four in the poetry. An example from the notes is: 屯倉此 
云彌夜氣 “ ‘royal demesnes’ is read miyake” (NSG). 

NSK 59 

比佐箇多能 pisakata no On the heavenly metal loom 

阿梅箇儺麼多 ame kanabata used by Princess Metori, 

謎廼利餓 myetori ga a bird in the sky, 

於瑠筒儺麼多 oru kanabata she is weaving fabric 

波揶歩佐和氣能 payabusa wake no to make an outer garment 

瀰於須譬鵝泥 miosupigane for Hayabusa Wake. 

Ōno (1977:389) also notes that 氣 is the main graph used to transcribe ke in 
Man’yōshū. 

MYS 60 

暮相而 YOPI NI APITE Was it at Nabari 

朝面無美 ASITA OMO NAmi where I met you at night 

隠尓加 NABARI ni ka but in the morning you hid, 

氣長妹之 KENAGAKI IMWO GA my beloved staying in a hut 

廬利為里計武 IPOri SErikyemu after your long journey? 

The simplified form of this graph (気) became katakana ケ. 

 

戒 


OJ: ke OC: *krə̂ h 

LH: kɛh EMC: kəɨj LMC: kja:j GO: kai KN: kai 

NOM: giới, giái SV: giới, giái SK: kyey 


Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the CBS, appearing only once the poetry of Nihon 
shoki. 

NSK 36 

瀰豆多摩蘆 midu tamaru Water dammed up at 

豫佐瀰能伊戒珥 yosami no ike ni the reservoir of Yosami— 

奴那波區利 nunapa kuri I did not realize 

破陪鷄區辭羅珥 papekyeku sirani how far the water shield 

委遇比菟區 wigupi tuku had grown. 

 

開 


OJ: ke OC: *khə̂ i 

LH: khəi EMC: khəj LMC: khaj GO: kai KN: kai 

NOM: khai, khơi SV: khai SK: koy 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the CBS, and is only found in Nihon shoki, once in the 
annotational notes, and ten times in the poetry: 木此云開 “ ‘Tree’ is read ke” 
(NSG). 

NSK 16 

宇磨佐開 umasake What sweet sake! 

瀰和能等能々 miwa no tono no How we wish to return 

阿佐妬珥毛 asatwo nimo to our homes this morning, 

伊弟氐由介那 idete yukana going through the gate 

瀰和能等能渡塢 miwa no tonotwo wo of this, the shrine of Miwa. 

 

該 


OJ: ke OC: *kə̂ 

LH: kə EMC: kəj LMC: kaj GO: kai KN: kai 

NOM: cai, cơi SV: cai SK: koy, hoy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears twice in the annotational 
notes and seven times in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 覆槽、此云于該 “ ‘an 
overturned tub’ is read uke” (NSG). 

NSK 80 

婀拕羅斯枳 atarsiki Such a pitiful waste, 

偉儺謎能陀倶彌 winabye no tagumi that inking string used by 

柯該志須彌儺皤 kakesi suminapa the Inabe carpenter. 

旨我那稽麼 si ga nakyeba If he is no longer here, 

拕例柯々該武預 tare ka kakemu yo what skilled person will remain 

婀拕羅須彌儺皤 atara suminapa to use the inking string? 

 

慨 


OJ: ke OC: *khə̂ s 

LH: khəh EMC: khəj LMC: khaj GO: kai KN: kai 

NOM: khới, khái SV: khái SK: kay 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the CBS, and it is used once in Nihon shoki, in one 
poem: 


NSK 60 

破夜歩佐波 payabusa pa The quick falcon 

阿梅珥能朋利 ame ni nobori climbs into the sky 

等弭箇慨梨 tobikakeri and soars overhead. 

伊菟岐餓宇倍能 ituki ga upe no Dive down and capture the wren 

裟奘岐等羅佐泥 kazaki torasane that is upon the sacred place. 

 

概 


OJ: ke OC: *kə̂ s 

LH: kəh EMC: kəj LMC: kaj GO: kai KN: kai 

NOM: khái SV: cái SK: kay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears in the annotational notes 
once and once in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 不負於族此云宇我邏磨概茸 
“ ‘won’t lose to a relative’ is read ugara makezi” (NSG). It should be mentioned 
that all manuscripts agree the phonogram here should be 穊, but the phonology 
of that graph does not match well: EMC kij and LMC kij, with both GO and KN 
being ki. It is true that SK has kuy, but there is no other proof for a diphthongal 
original in either SV or NOM. Consider also that the poem below has 概, which 
fits the phonological pattern better. If it were not for the graphic similarity (木 > 
禾), and the suspicion that 概 was corrupted to 穊, I would create two separate 
entries. As is, I believe the original graph for both the annotational note and the 
poem was 概. 

NSK 24 

阿佐志毛能 asasimwo no The morning frost melts— 

瀰概能佐烏麼志 mike no sawobasi courtiers cross over 

魔弊菟耆瀰 mapyetu kimi the little tree bridge 

伊和哆羅秀暮 iwatarasu mo to and fro from work; 

瀰開能佐烏麼志 mike no sawobasi over the little tree bridge. 

 

凱 


OJ: ke OC: *khə̂ i 

LH: khəi EMC: khəj LMC: khaj GO: kai KN: kai 

NOM: ngai SV: khải SK: kay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It is particular to Nihon shoki, found 
only once in the poetry. 

NSK 83 

伊儺武斯盧 inamusiro The willow growing along 

呵簸泝比野儺擬 kapaswopi yanagwi the banks of the river bends 

寐逗愈凱麼 midu yukeba with the flow of the water. 

儺弭企於己陀智 nabiki okwitati Fluttering or standing tall 

曾能泥播宇世儒 sono ne pa usezu the roots remain unchanged. 

 

愷 


OJ: ke OC: *khəjʔ 

LH: khəi EMC: khəj LMC: khaj GO: kai KN: kai 

NOM: NA SV: khải SK: kay 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram also belongs to the CBS, it being a graphic variation of 凱. 
This phonogram (愷) is found once in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 

NSK 98 

比攞哿駄喩 pirakata yu Heading up through 

輔曳輔枳能朋樓 puye puki noboru the port of Hirakata 

阿符美能野 apumi no ya someone plays a flute. 

愷那能倭倶吾伊 kena no wakugwo i It is young Kena of Afumi, 

輔曳符枳能朋樓 puye puki noboru playing as he rows upstream. 

 

階 


OJ: ke OC: *krî or *krə̂ i 

LH: kɛi EMC: kəɨj LMC: kja:j GO: ke KN: kai 

NOM: NA SV: giai SK: koy, kyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears once in the poetry of Nihon 
shoki. 

NSK 17 

宇磨佐階 umasake What sweet sake! 

瀰和能等能々 miwa no tono no Now that it is morning 

阿佐妬珥毛 asa two nimo be on your way home— 

於辭寐羅箇禰 osibirakane push open the gate 

瀰和能等能渡烏 miwa no tono two wo of this, the shrine of Miwa. 

 

毛 


OJ: ke OC: *mhaw 

LH: mau EMC: maw GO: mou KN: bou 

NOM: mao, mau SV: mao SK: mwo 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ ke ‘hair.’ There is an old usage of 
this in the Suiko era corpus, in the Jōgūki genealogy: 若野毛二俣王 “Prince 
WAKANUKE PUTAMATA,” which actually may be a later interpolation in the 
text. The earliest datable example appears in the Mino Census of 702: 毛无 
KEmu and 毛里賣 KErimye. 

This graph appears eight times in Kojiki, used in names like 御毛沼命 
MIKENU [NO] MIKOTO (KG), 豊御毛沼命 TOYO MIKENU [NO] MIKOTO 
(KG), and 若野毛二俣王 Prince WAKANUKE PUTAMATA (KG). 

This same kungana appears 70 times in Nihon shoki, in toponyms like 上毛 
野國 KAMITU KENWO [NO] KUNI (NSG), 下毛野國 SIMOTU KENWO [NO] 
KUNI (NSG), and personal names such as 三毛入野命 MIKE IRINWO [NO] 
MIKOTO (NSG), 毛野臣 KENA [NO] OMI (NSG), and 毛媛 KE [NO] PIMYE 
(NSG). 

Interestingly, Man’yōshū only uses this kungana four times in the entire 
anthology. This is likely because the phonogram 毛 was primarily used to 
transcribe OJ mwo or mo (which see). One example is below, though there is 
disagreement about whether it represents ke or ge. 

MYS 3878 

堦楯 PASITATE NO In the bog of Kumaki 

熊來乃夜良爾 KUMAKI no yara ni of the standing ladder— 


新羅斧 SIRAKWI WONO his Silla axe 

堕入和之 OTOSI IRE wasi he has dropped. Yo ho. 

阿毛低阿毛低 aGEte aGEte Lifting! Lifting up your voice 

勿鳴為曽祢 NA NAKASI so ne do not weep so. 

浮出流夜登将見 UKI IDUru ya to Let us watch 

将見和之 MIMU wasi to see if it comes up. Yo ho. 

 

食 


OJ: ke OC: *m-lək 

LH: źɨk EMC: ʑik GO: ziki KN: sioku 

NOM: thực SV: tự, thực SK: sik 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, suggesting to the mind the OJ word ke ‘food,’ but 
generally food to be presented to the deities. This usage appears on several 
mokkan: 大矢食女 OPOYAKEmye (unnumbered tablet). 

This usage appears in Kojiki in names like 御食津大神 The great deity 
MIKETU (KG), or 豐御食炊屋比賣命 TOYO MIKE KASIKIYA Pimye [NO] 
MIKOTO (KG). 

This same usage appears in Nihon shoki six times, all in the name of Suiko, 
豐御食炊屋姫 TOYO MIKE KASIKIYA [NO] PIMYE. 

Man’yōshū contains only four examples of this kungana. 

MYS 377 

青山之 AWOYAMA NO The white clouds 

嶺乃白雲 MINE no SIRAKUMO of the peak of blue mountains— 

朝尓食尓 ASA ni KE ni though I gaze at them 

恒見杼毛 TUNE NI MIREdomo every morning, every day: 

目頬四吾君 MEDURAsi A GA KIMI marvelous is the beauty of my lord. 

 

飼 


OJ: ke OC: *s-ləkh 

LH: ziəh EMC: ʑɨ GO: zi KN: si 

NOM: NA SV: tư SK: so 

Usage / History: 

This kunganas represents OJ ke ‘food for animals.’ This usage is confined to 
Man’yōshū, where it appears only three times. 

MYS 256 

飼飯海乃 KEPI NO UMI no It seems that the fishing place 

庭好有之 NIPA YOKU ARAsi on the Kehi Sea is peaceful. 

苅薦乃 KARIKOMO no I can see the confusion, 

乱出所見 MIDARETE IDU MIYU like slashed rushes 

海人釣船 AMA NO TURIBUNE of the fishing boats rowing out. 

 

消 


OJ: ke OC: *siau 

LH: siau EMC: siaw GO: seu KN: seu 

NOM: tiêu, teo SV: tiêu SK: sywo 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, and calls to mind OJ ke the infinitive of ku ‘to vanish, 
disappear.’ This usage appears once in Man’yōshū. 


MYS 2347 

海小船 AMA WOBUNE Like the snow that falls 

泊瀬乃山尓 PATUSE no YAMA ni on Mount Hatsuse, 

落雪之 PURU YUKI NO a mount like small fishing boats, 

消長戀師 KENAGAKU KWOPWIsi I hear the sound of my lord who 

君之音曽為流 KIMI GA OTO so SUru I have yearned for many days. 

 

笥 


OJ: ke OC: *səh 

LH: siəh EMC: sɨ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: NA SV: tư, tứ SK: so 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, suggesting to the reader OJ ke ‘container.’ This usage only 
appears in Nihon shoki, used six times. This usage appears in the place name 笥 
飯 KEPI, as well as the name 笥飯大神 the great deity KEPI, and a personal 
name, 吾笥 AKE. 

 

支 


OJ: ki < *ke OC: *ke 

LH: *kie > tśe EMC: tɕia GO: si KN: si 

NOM: chi, giê, xài, xê SV: chi SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. The antiquity of this usage can also be 
garnered from Sino-Xenic data, because none of our SX data preserve the initial 
velar, all examples having undergone palatalization. Therefore, the Nom data is 
crucial, because it preserves one reading with a velar, giê. What is of further 
importance is the height of the vowel: *ke. The earliest Wa usage appears in Wei 
zhi, in the titles 爾支 *ne-ke, 伊支馬 *i-ke-ma, 彌馬獲支 *mi-ma-wek-ke, 
and the toponyms 一支 *i-ke, 己百支 *kə-pak-ke, 都支 *tɔ-ke, and 支惟 
*ke-wi. 

This graph also appears on the Kwangkaytho stele. The following example 
appears on the stele: 析支利城 *sek-ke-ri ‘Sekkeri Fortress.’ 

More evidence for this graph appears on the Inariyama sword inscription 
(early fifth century). The relevant passage contains the name of the king: 獲加多 
支鹵大王. Japanese scholars have insisted on reading this as Waka Takeru. 
Miller and Murayama suggest the reading of Waka Takiru (1979:422), but their 
notes revise this to something like Wakka Takiru (1979:424). Based on Later 
Han, the most appropriate reading is LH: ɣuɑk-kai-tɑi-kie-lɔʔ > Waka Takyerwo. 
As Miyake (2003b:122–123) has pointed out, the correctness of this inscription is 
further supported by the history of Japanese. We know from Ryūkyūan data that 
historically the adnominal form of verbs was *-o. Hence this name appears to 
mean ‘(the individual who is) young and fierce.’ 

This phonogram 支 is not in the extant Paekche inscriptions, but it does 
appear in the Paekche quotes in Nihon shoki. 直支 *tɨk-kie，the name of the 
crown prince of Paekche. Notice that Shoki glosses this name as トキ (perhaps 
reflecting original [təkki] < 直 OC *d(h)rək). There is also 印支彌 *ikime, a 
word of unclear meaning. From context in Shoki it appears to be a personal name. 

The phonogram 支 also survived into the Suiko-era EJS. A good example is 
the Suiko-era genealogy contained in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu, which contains 


many examples, but I list only five: 伊志支那郎女 Irasikina IRATUMYE 
(daughter of Swoga Umakwo); 阿米久尓於志波留支 Ame Kuni Osiparuki 
(Kinmei); 怒那久良布刀多麻斯支 Nunakura Putwotamasiki (Bidatsu); 支多 
斯比売 Kitasi Pimye (wife of Crown Prince Shōtoku); 止余美氣加志支夜比売 
Toyo Mike Kasikiya Pimye (Suiko). This phonogram appears 14 times in the 
liturgies: 毛能和支物、毛能荒支物 KE no NIKOki KE no ARAki “fur that is soft 
and fur that is rough…” (NT 3). This phonogram also appears on a number of 
mokkan: 出雲評支豆支里 IDUMWO District Kiduki Village (MK 157), 伊都支 
宮奴婢 “the male and female slaves of the Holy (ituki) Palace…” (MK 1013). 

This graph does not appear in the poetry of Kojiki or Nihon shoki. It does 
appear in other records such as Fudoki, and Man’yōshū, and these are vestiges of 
the EJS orthography. For example, in Izumo fudoki there are examples of shrine 
names such as 支麻知社 Kimati Shrine, 支布佐社 Kipusa Shrine, and 支豆 
支社 Kiduki Shrine. 

In Man’yōshū this phonogram appears 15 times, but all examples are 
confined to Book 18. 

MYS 4045 

於伎敝欲里 okipye ywori Like the tide which 

美知久流之保能 mitikuru sipo no rises from the offing 

伊也麻之尓 iya masi ni is it your august boat for which 

安我毛布支見我 a ga mopu kimi ga my longing increases— 

弥不根可母加礼 mipune kamo kare that one out there? 

 

耆 


OJ: ki OC: *ɡri 

LH: ɡɨ EMC: ɡji GO: gi KN: ki 

NOM: NA SV: kỳ, kì, kỉ SK: ki, ci 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, where it transcribes the personal name 
伊声耆 *ise-gə. This usage also appears in Koryŏgi in the noble title 乙耆 Jetɡji 
(Takeuchi 1977:34). By the Early Middle Chinese era, this graph phonetically 
represented a high, front vowel (*yi [i]). Perhaps the most well known example 
of this graph is preserved in the toponym 伯耆 papaki, the old province of 
Hahaki. Interestingly, Hahaki is written 波伯国 in the Record of the Provincial 
Governors in Kujiki. The oldest datable example of this usage appears in the 
Tenmu record (683) of Shoki. 

This phonogram appears 15 times in the poetry of Shoki. 

NSK 24 

阿佐志毛能 asasimwo no The morning frost melts— 

瀰穊能佐烏麼志 mike no sawobasi courtiers cross over 

魔弊菟耆瀰 mapyetu kimi the little tree bridge 

伊和哆羅秀暮 iwatarasu mo to and fro from work; 

瀰開能佐烏麼志 mike no sawobasi over the little tree bridge. 

 

岐 


OJ: ki OC: *ɡe 

LH: ɡie EMC: ɡjie GO: gi KN: ki 

NOM: NA SV: kỳ, kì SK: ki 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS, and along with 支, is one of the oldest 
known examples of this kind. This character appears in many Paekche personal 
names mentioned in Shoki: 波珍干岐 Patori Kanki (a Paekche royal rank); 阿 
直岐 Atiki (Envoy sent to Japan by king of Paekche); 意斯移麻岐彌 Osiyama 
Kimi (Japanese name recorded in Paekche pongi). 

This graph also appears in the EJS, from Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu: 菩岐々 
美郎 Pwoki Kimi IRATU(MYE) [wife to Kashiwade Katabu]. 

Also in the Gangōji Temple record we find the name of Suiko written: 等与 
彌氣賀斯岐夜比売 Toyo Mike Kasikiya Pimye. This phonogram also appears 
in the liturgies: 取葺計留草乃噪岐(古語云蘇蘇伎)無久 TORIPUkyeru KAYA 
SWOSWOki (KOGO NI swoswoki IPU)NAku “There will be no rustling of the grass 
thatched on the roof (‘rustle’ is swoswoki in the ancient vernacular)” (NT 8). This 
phonogram appears on a variety of mokkan: 讃岐国 Sanuki Province (MK 
2185), 須々岐 susuki ‘pampas grass’ or ‘perch’ (unnumbered tablet). 

The phonogram 岐 remained popular, and is used widely in Kojiki: 岐美 
kimi ‘lord’ (KG), 岐久 kiku hear’ (KG), 登岐 toki ‘time, when’ (KG). 

KK 60 

美母呂能 mimoro no The moor of Ōiko 

曾能多迦紀那流 sono takakwi naru in the highlands of 

意富韋古賀波良 opowikwo ga para Mount Mimoro— 

意富韋古賀 opowikwo ga like its name 

波良迩阿流 para ni aru there are large boars 

岐毛牟加布 kimwo mukapu with hearts opposite the liver. 

許許呂袁陀迩賀 kokoro wo dani ka Could you not at least 

阿比淤母波受阿良牟 apiomopazu aramu think of me in that heart? 

It also appears quite frequently in Nihon shoki, 18 times in the annotational 
notes, and 24 times in poetry: 檍、此云阿波岐 “ ‘holm oak’ is read apaki” 
(NSG). 

NSK 1 

夜句茂多兔 yakumo tatu Endowed with power, 

伊弩毛夜覇餓岐 idumwo yapegaki this two-fold Izumo fence— 

兔磨語味爾 tuma gome ni to conceal ourselves, 

夜覇餓枳都倶盧 yapegaki tukuru I have built this two-fold fence. 

贈廼夜覇餓岐廻 sono yapegaki we Yes, within this two-fold fence! 

This phonogram also appears quite frequently in Books 5, 17, and 20 of 
Man’yōshū. 

MYS 815 

武都紀多知 mutukwi tati When the moon of the new year 

波流能吉多良婆 paru no kitaraba rises and spring has arrived, 

可久斯許曽 kakusi koso we will enjoy oursleves, 

烏梅乎乎岐都々 ume wo wokitutu inviting the plum to bloom 

多努之岐乎倍米 tanwosiki wopeme as we do right now. 

 


吉 


OJ: ki, kiti OC: *kit 

LH: kit EMC: kjit GO: kiti KN: kitu 

NOM: kiết, cát SV: cát SK: kil 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It does not appear in Paekche 
inscriptions, but does appear in Silla inscriptions. I have earlier stated (Bentley 
2000) that Silla’s orthography likely was influenced by the Koguryŏ system. 
Consider this name from the Wisu Silla Chencen stone inscription (ca. 539 CE), 
智壱吉干支 *Teh-it-kit Kan-ki. 

This phonogram is found in the Suiko era corpus, again attesting to its 
antiquity. It would appear that originally this phonogram was important because 
it preserved a dental-final. This may have been important if geminate consonants 
were used to signal a following short vowel. For example, the oldest extant 
example comes from Tenjukoku shuchō, where Suiko’s name is written 吉多斯 
比彌乃彌己等, kitasi pimye mikoto. Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu represents 
Suiko’s name with the same characters, suggesting that this usage was likely the 
contemporary representation of the name of the empress. 

The ancient place name, Kibi 吉備 kibwi, is preserved in Kujiki, Kojiki, and 
Nihon shoki, all using the same usage. The Paekche physician, 吉宜, appears in 
the fourth year of Emperor Mommu (700 CE), “And to the priest Hye Chun, the 
emperor bestowed the surname kitu (吉) and the name yorosi (宜).” 

A final example comes from the Paekche-based title, kisi 吉士, which 
means a ruler or overseer, analogous to the Egyptian tradition. It later became the 
14 rank in the 17 rank system of Silla. All examples in Japan and Korea use 吉 
for the first syllable, except for a few places in Samguk sagi, where the graphs 
稽知, EMC khɛj tri are used. Here it would seem that in the Korean system, the 
dental stop -t found in the original has replaced the sibilant -s-. It thus seems 
clear that the use of 吉 came from Paekche, with its attending final stop. 

Aside from the usage of Kibi, all other examples of this graph in Kojiki 
transcribe 吉師 kisi, a rank attached to a name. This phonogram appears in 
Nihon shoki in one poem: 

NSK 40 

儾伽多佐例阿羅智之 taka tasare aratisi Who is taking my consort? 

吉備那流伊慕塢 kibwi naru imo wo I had just become intimate 

阿比瀰菟流慕能 apimituru mono with that maiden from Kibi. 

This phonogram was the second most popular graph to represent OJ ki in 
Man’yōshū. 

MYS 917 

神代従 KAMWIYO YWORI This has been revered 

然曽尊吉 SIKA so TAPUTWOki ever since the age of the gods— 

玉津嶋夜麻 TAMATU SIMA yama Mount Tamatsushima. 

In relation to the reading of kiti, this phonogram belongs to the LJS. The 
earliest examples all appear in Shoku Nihongi: 吉田 Kitita (724.5.13). It also 
likely was used because of the final -t in cases such as 吉智 Kiti (719.1.13), and 
吉提 Kite (711.4.7). 

 


枳 


OJ: ki OC: *keʔ 

LH: kieʔ EMC: tɕia GO: ki KN: ki 

NOM: NA SV: chỉ SK: ki, ci 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. The record of Keitai mentions the 
names of three walled cities on the peninsula: 騰利枳牟羅 Toriki Mura・牟雌 
枳牟羅 Musiki Mura・久知波多枳 Kutipataki (Ienaga et al. 1986.2:45). 

This phonogram also appears extensively in Shoki, 15 times in annotational 
notes, and 91 times in poetry. Ōno Tōru (1962:150–151) offers this striking 
comment regarding the use of this phonogram in Nihon shoki, “The graph 枳 is 
not used as often as 吉, but it appears in Shoki very frequently. Likely it was 
originally a popular phonogram, appearing often in the peninsular proper names 
recorded in Shoki, but this does not necessarily mean we should admit any 
peninsular phonological influence on the use of the phonogram 枳.” 

On the contrary, I believe that the abundant use of this phonogram in the text 
of Shoki shows a marked preference for phonograms introduced by peninsular 
scribes, especially the historians and scribes from Paekche. The phonology of 枳 
is similar to 支 (LH kie > tśe, EMC tɕia), and this correspondence, while not 
definite, at least leaves the possibility open. 

Below is one example each of 枳 in Nihon shoki from the annotational notes 
and poetry: 不須也凶目汚穢、此云伊儺之居梅枳枳多儺枳 “ ‘Refuse, 
hideous, and polluted,’ this is read ina sikomeki kitanaki” (NSG). 

NSK 32 

虚能彌企破 kono miki pa This divine wine is not 

和餓彌企那羅儒 wa ga miki narazu divine wine of my brewing. 

區之能伽彌 kusi no kami The wondrous director 

等虚豫珥伊麻輸 tokoyo ni imasu who dwells in the Eternal Land, 

伊破多々須 ipatatasu strong like the eternal rocks, 

周玖那彌伽未能 sukuna mikamwi no the deity Sukuna— 

等豫保枳 toyo poki It is he who brewed this wine 

保枳茂苔陪之 pokimotoposi with an eternal blessing, 

訶武保枳 kamupoki dancing he blessed this wine 

保枳玖流保之 pokikuruposi with divine, auspicious words. 

摩菟利虚辭彌企層 maturi kosi miki so This wine was presented by him. 

阿佐孺塢齋 asazu wose Drink every drop. 

佐佐 sa sa Drink! Drink! 

 

棄 


OJ: ki OC: *khis or *khits 

LH: khis EMC: khij GO: ki KN: ki 

NOM: NA SV: khí SK: ki 

Usage / History: 

I tentatively place this phonogram in the PBS, based on evidence from a 
fragment of an inscription on the Tanyang Silla Red Fortress stele (ca. 550): 異 
棄耶国 *i-khi-ya domain. 

This phonogram does not appear in the Taihō and Yōrō census fragments, 
but it does appear in the imperial decrees of 749 and 758, both transcribing 神魯 
棄 KAMUrwoki ‘divine ancestor.’ Motoori Norinaga changed 棄 to 伎 in his 


collated text of edicts, believing the former to have been a mistake (MNZ 1976, 
7:300). Interestingly, this phonogram does not appear anywhere else in Shoku 
Nihongi. 

This phonogram 棄 appears only once in Kojiki, KK 4 曾邇奴棄宇弖, so 
ni nuki ute, “take [this] off and cast it behind me” (KG). Ōno persuasively argues 
that there is an orthographic and semantic interplay here (1962:616), since 棄 
transcribes the ki for the infinitive of the verb nuk- ‘take off,’ with the meaning of 
the phonogram ‘cast aside, discard.’ 

The same type of usage appears in Book 5 of Man’yōshū: 

MYS 849 

能許利多流 nokoritaru The plum blossoms 

由棄仁末自例留 yuki ni mazireru are interspersed with 

宇梅能半奈 ume no pana the remaining snow. 

半也久奈知利曽 payaku na tiri so Do not scatter so quickly, 

由吉波氣奴等勿 yuki pa kenu tomo even if the snow should vanish. 

This also is a graphic play on the Chinese 遺棄, “be forgotten, left aside” (cf. 
Ōno 1977:370). 

This phonogram only appears three times in Shoki, twice in annotational 
notes, and once in the poetry: 慨哉此云宇黎多棄伽夜 “ ‘How painful it is’ in 
the vernacular is uretaki kaya” (NSG). 

NSK 96 

麼左棄逗囉 masakidura …wrapped it around her. 

多々企阿藏播梨 tataki azapari And like a vine, 

矢洎矩矢慮 sisikusiro we caressed, intertwined. 

于魔伊禰矢度儞 umai nesi two ni We slept deeply, 

儞播都等唎 nipatu tori sweet like meat on a skewer. 

柯稽播儺倶儺梨 kakye pa nakunari The fowl I keep have begun to cackle. 

 

伎 


OJ: ki OC: *ke 

LH: kie EMC: ɡiə̆ GO: gi KN: ki 

NOM: NA SV: kĩ, kỹ SK: ki 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The first datable examples of this graph 
appear in the Mino Census of 702: 佐佐伎賣 Sasakimye. This phonogram also 
appears in the liturgies: 取葺計留草乃噪岐(古語云蘇蘇伎)無久 TORIPUkyeru 
KAYA SWOSWOki (KOGO NI swoswoki IPU) NAku “There will be no rustling of the 
grass thatched on the roof (‘rustle’ is swoswoki in the ancient vernacular)” (NT 8). 
This phonogram is also found on a number of mokkan: 伎万呂 Kimaro (MK 
1996), 百済部伎弥麻呂 KUDARABYE Kimimaro (MK 16). 

This graph also appears in Kojiki, in place names such as 隠伎 Oki and 伯 
伎 Papaki, and names like 伊邪那伎 Izanaki. This usage is probably an 
adjustment (or eveolution) of 支 > 伎. This graph is also used in some poetry in 
Kojiki: 

KK 69 

波斯多弖能 pasitate no Because Mount Kurahashi 

久良波斯夜麻袁 kurapasi yama wo which is like a standing ladder 

佐賀志美登 sagasimi to is so steep that you 


伊波迦伎加泥弖 ipa kakikanete cannot grab on to boulders, 

和賀弖登良須母 wa ga te torasu mo so she even takes my hand. 

This is the primary phonogram in Man’yōshū to represent ki. 

MYS 12 

吾欲之 WA GA PORIsi You have shown me 

野嶋波見世追 NWOSIMA pa MIsetu the Island of No I desired to see. 

底深伎 SOKO PUKAki But you have not found 

阿胡根能浦乃 agwoNE no URA no the pearl on the deep sea bottom 

珠曽不拾 TAMA so PIRIPANU of the bay of Agone. 

This phonogram appears fairly frequently in the Bussoku poetic sequence: 

BSS 12 

佐伎波比乃 sakipapi no The band of brothers 

阿都伎止毛加羅 atuki tomogara who are greatly blessed 

麻爲多利弖 mawitarite journeyed and saw these 

麻佐米尓弥祁牟 masame ni mikyemu with their actual eyes— 

比止乃止毛志佐 pito no tomosi sa Praise be to them. 

宇礼志久毛阿留可 uresiku mo aru ka How delighted are we, too. 

 

企 


OJ: ki OC: *kheʔ or *kheh 

LH: khieʔ, khieh EMC: khjiə GO: ki KN: ki 

NOM: xí SV: khí, xí SK: ki 

Usage / History: 

I place this phonogram in the LJS. This graph is found in the beta section of 
Nihon shoki, appearing three times in the annotational notes, and 22 times in the 
poetry: 開此云波羅企 “ ‘open’ is read paraki” (NSG). 

NSK 33 

許能彌企塢 kono miki wo Did the person who 

伽彌鷄武比等破 kamikyemu pito pa brewed this auspicious wine 

曾能菟豆彌 sono tudumi rest his resounding drum 

于輸珥多氐々 usu ni tatete like a grinding mortar, 

于多比菟々 utapitutu and brew this wine 

伽彌鷄梅伽墓 kamikyeme kamo while he sang a song? 

許能彌企能 kono miki no It is strange 

阿椰珥 aya ni how very 

于多娜濃芝 utadanwosi delightful this wine is. 

作沙 sa sa Drink! Drink! 

This phonogram is used sparingly in Man’yōshū, appearing only in Book 5. 

MYS 823 

烏梅能波奈 ume no pana Where is it that 

知良久波伊豆久 tiraku pa iduku plum blossoms are scattering? 

志可須我尓 sikasu ga ni Even if it is true— 

許能紀能夜麻尓 kono kwi no yama ni it continues to snow 

由企波布理都々 yuki pa puritutu here on Mount Ki. 

This phonogram 企 is used once in the imperial edicts of Shoku Nihongi 
(769), 逆 爾 在 謀 乎 起 臣 等 方 己 我 比 伎 婢企是 爾 託 SAKASIMA ni ARU 
PAKARIGOTO wo TATE OMITATI pa ONO ga piki piki KORE ni TUKI “revolts against 


reason have occurred, and the commoner has done as he pleases (piki piki) 
following this [or that ruler]” (SM 45). 

 

祇 


OJ: ki OC: *ke 

LH: kie, gɨi EMC: ɡjiə LMC: kɦji GO: gi KN: ki 

NOM: NA SV: kỳ, khì, kì SK: ki 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, while OJ gi belongs to the PBS (see 祇 
OJ: gi). This phonogram only appears in Shoki, used three times in poetry. 

NSK 104 

佐須陀氣能 sasu take no Do you have no lord, 

枳彌波夜那祇 kimi paya naki strong like bamboo? 

伊比爾惠弖 ipi ni wete Starving for want of food 

許夜勢留 koyaseru how pitiful is that farmer 

諸能多比等阿波禮 sono tapito apare who has fallen. 

 

祁 


OJ: ki OC: *ɡij 

LH: ɡɨ EMC: ɡji LMC: kɦji GO: gi KN: ki 

NOM: NA SV: kỳ, kì SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears once in Nihon shoki, in the 
following poem. 

NSK 96 

野絁磨倶儞 yasima kuni I searched the eight islands 

都磨々祁哿泥底 tuma makikanete but could not find a spouse. 

播屢比能 parupi no Under the spring sun 

哿須我能倶儞々 kasuga no kuni ni in the land of Kasuga 

倶波絁謎嗚 kupasi mye wo I had heard that 

阿利等枳々底 ari to kikite there was a beautiful maiden. 

 

來 


OJ: ki OC: *rə < *rə̂ k 

LH: lə EMC: ləj GO: rai KN: rai 

NOM: lai, lơi, lay SV: lai SK: lai 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, suggesting to the reader the infinitive of the verb kuru 
‘come’ > ki. This kungana appears in Shoki, used in proper names: 倭國今來郡 
YAMATO Province IMAKI district. This usage also appears in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3878 

堦楯 PASITATE NO In the bog of Kumaki 

熊來乃夜良爾 KUMAKI no yara ni of the standing ladder— 

新羅斧 SIRAKWI WONO his Silla axe 

堕入和之 OTOSI IRE wasi he has dropped. Yo ho. 

阿毛低阿毛低 aGEte aGEte Lifting! Lifting up your voice 

勿鳴為曽祢 NA NAKASI so ne do not weep so. 

浮出流夜登将見 UKI IDUru ya to Let us watch 

将見和之 MIMU wasi to see if it comes up. Yo ho. 


This usage also appears in Izumo fudoki, which originated around 733. All 
examples are toponyms: 安 來 YASUKI, 來 待 KIMATI, and 久 來 門 
kuKIDWO. 

 

寸 


OJ: ki OC: *tshûns 

LH: tshuənh EMC: tshwən GO: sumu KN: son 

NOM: thốn, són, xốn SV: thốn SK: chwon 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ ki ‘inch.’ One of the earliest known usages 
with this graph is the kabane known as Imiki 忌寸, which was established in the 
reign of Tenmu in 684 as the fourth rank. Interestingly, the first three ranks 
(Mabito, Asomi, Sukune) were bestowed upon loyal and valiant families whom 
the court could trust. Lower ranking families retained their old designations. The 
fourth rank was bestowed mainly on families of foreign birth, as if this rank was 
used to divide the important families from the low, with the foreigners squeezed 
in between. 

That appears to be the reason for the orthography, imi ‘avoid’ and ki a word 
of unclear origins, but if the orthography is any hint, it is a measurement. Shoku 
Nihongi records, “And those designated imiki (伊美吉) will have their title 
changed to 忌寸” (759.10.8). It has also been discovered in various documents 
and fragments that most people recorded the title as 伊美伎, so the designation 
in Shoki takes on greater meaning, that being the stigma of having 忌 ‘avoid’ 
attached. 

The oldest datable example of 寸 is a tombstone from 707, with the 
inscription 文忌寸禰麻呂, where the title imiki appears. This phonogram also 
appears 119 times in Man’yōshū showing how popular it had become. As Ōno 
explains, of these 119 examples, 56 are attached to adjectives as a perfective, and 
19 are attached to verbs to show past tense (1977:361). MYS 32 is a simple 
example. 

MYS 32 

古 INISIPYE NO Am I a person 

人尓和礼有哉 PITO ni ware ARE YA from the ancient past? 

樂浪乃 SASANAMI no It saddens me 

故京乎 PURUKI MIYAKWO wo to look at the remains 

見者悲寸 MIREBA KANASIKI of the old capital at Sasanami. 

 

杵 


OJ: ki OC: *thaʔ 

LH: tśhɑʔ EMC: tɕhuə GO: siyo KN: siyo 

NOM: ngó, ngõ, ngỏ SV: chử SK: cye 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ ki, ‘pestle,’ a truncated form of OJ 
kine. The phonogram 杵 appears in Kojiki five times, all in notes dealing with 
proper names or other words. An example of this graph in Kojiki appears in the 
name 大入杵命 OPOIRIKI. 

Likewise, in Shoki this phonogram is used in proper names. Two examples 
from Nihon shoki are: 市杵嶋姫 ITIKI SIMA PIMYE (NSG), and 天之杵火火置 
瀬尊 AMA NO KIPOPO KISE (NSG). Both examples lead me to believe that the 


kungana was consciously used to represent names with a magico-religious value, 
but because of a belief in kotodama, the power of words, individuals avoided the 
graph in regular writing. The most famous example of this phonogram used in a 
proper name in Nihon shoki is the founder of the Japanese imperial line, Ninigi 
no mikoto, 瓊々杵尊, who according to recorded tradition was the great-greatgrandfather 
of Jinmu. 

This phonogram appears only a few times in Man’yōshū, two of which 
appear in poems. 

MYS 1022 

父公尓 TITIGIMI ni To my father 

吾者真名子叙 WARE PA MANAGWO zo I am a true-named child. 

妣刀自尓 PAPA twozi ni To my mother 

吾者愛兒叙 WARE PA MANAGWO zo I am a dear child. 

参昇 MAWINOBORU At the awe-inspiring hill 

八十氏人乃 YASWO UDIPITO no where large groups of people 

手向為 TAMUKE SURU climb to come up to the capital 

恐乃坂尓 KASIKWO no SAKA ni and present offerings 

幣奉 NUSA MATURI I have made my offering, 

吾者叙追 WARE PA zo OPYERU and continue on my way— 

遠杵土左道矣 TOPOKI tosaDI WO down the distant road to Tosa. 

 

己 


OJ: ko OC: *kəʔ 

LH: kɨəʔ EMC: kɨ GO: ko KN: ki 

NOM: kỷ SV: kỷ, kỉ SK: ki 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, appearing in the toponym 己百支 *kəpak-
ke. This phonogram also appears in the Paekche orthographic pool in Nihon 
shoki numerous times: 己富利知伽 Kopori Tika, a toponym, and a personal 
name, 己州己婁 Kotukorwo. The fourth graph is often read as ru, but I follow 
the OC > LOC development of this graph (OC *r(h)o > l(h)wo). 

There is a possibility that this graph (己) is also preserved on the Inariyama 
tumulus sword inscription. The name in question is commonly interpreted as 弖 
巳加利 *te-X-ka-ri. Consider, however, that the engraving of the inscription on 
this sword was done by a native smith who was illiterate. This means that he 
likely could not make a distinction between 己・已・巳, all three being distinct 
graphs. To those who may say that it is difficult to believe that a smith would 
carve too far on the final stroke, consider that another graph, 居 is cut so it the 
intial three strokes looks like 𡰣, with the left side of the upper ‘box’ open, even 
though it should be closed. The logical conclusion is that the smith could not read 
Chinese, and simply imitated what may have been a beautifully written script. 

Of these three graphs noted above, the most commonly used is undoubtedly 
己. This makes the reading of the name somewhat easier. Miller and Murayama 
(1979:421) postulated the name as Teyö kari wakë. If the first two graphs 
actually are 弖己, then the reading may have been teko. Perhaps the true reading 
of this name is teko-kari waka. 

This phonogram is used in the earliest Japanese texts. In Jōgū Shōtoku hōō 
teisetsu, the honorific suffix mikoto is represented as 弥己等 mikoto. Also in 


Jōgūki we find the name 伊波己里和氣 Ipakori Wake. This phonogram 
appears on a number of mokkan: 止己侶 tokoro ‘place?’ (MKK 22:291), 己乃 
己米 kono kome ‘this rice’ (MKK 16:15), 麻己止 makoto ‘truth’ (MK 29). 

Interestingly this graph was avoided by the compiler of Kojiki, who preferred 
許 to represent ko. Similarily Nihon shoki does not use this graph, aside from 
quotes from Paekche material. Instead Shoki prefers 虚 or 許 for ko. 

Because of its ecelctic nature, Man’yōshū uses both 許 and 己 for ko. A 
typical example is MYS 3757: 

MYS 3757 

安我未許曽 a ga mwi koso Though my body 

世伎夜麻故要弖 seki yama kwoyete is here, having 

許己尓安良米 koko ni arame crossed barriers and mountains, 

許己呂波伊毛尓 kokoro pa imwo ni my heart has remained 

与里尓之母能乎 yorinisi mono wo with my beloved. 

The distinction between kwo and ko lasted longer than any other distinction 
in OJ. The distinction is still preserved in Shinsen jikyō (ca. 899). See 古 OJ 
kwo for more information. 

The phopnograph 己 written in a cursive style results in modern hiragana 
こ, while the first half of this phonogram became katakana コ. 

 

許 


OJ: ko OC: *sŋaʔ 

LH: hɨɑ EMC: xɨə̆ GO: ko KN: ki 

NOM: hưá, hớ, hử, hữ SV: hưá SK: he, hwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. While it does not appear on any 
Paekche stele, it is preserved in several names recorded from Paekche sources in 
Nihon shoki. For example, in the record of Jingū the name of a Silla envoy 
appears: 微叱許智伐旱 Mwisi Koti Potkan. This name appeared earlier in the 
same record, written as 微叱己知波珍干岐 Mwisi Koti Patori Kanki. The 
editors of Nihon shoki believe this name points to the Silla Prince Misahun 未斯 
欣 (LH mui-sie-hɨn) (Ienaga et al. 1986.1:339, n. 24). This is highly probable, 
because the phonology of the names is too close to be coincidental. 

This graph also appears on the Tanyang ‘Red Fortress’ stele in Silla (ca. 
550): □□許利之四年 .’..in the fourth year of XX-kori....’ 

Another Paekche scholar attached to the court of Tenji is 許率母 Kosotmo 
(Ienaga et al. 1986, 2:376). 

This phonogram (許) is also found in the extant Suiko era corpus, in poems 
preserved in Jōgū shōtoku taishi hōō teisetsu, a biography of Shōtoku Taishi. 
Below is one example of this phonogram in the poetry. 

伊加留我乃 ikaruga no Our Great Ruler’s name 

止美能乎何波乃 tomi no wogapa no will never be forgotten, 

多叡婆許曾 tayeba koso even if the brook 

和何於保支美乃 wa ga opokimi no Tomi in Ikaruga 

弥奈和須良叡米 mina wasurayeme should cease to flow in its bed. 

This phonogram also appears in the Mino Census register of 702: 許勢朝臣 
Kose Asomi. In the Chikuzen Census register of the same year we find names 
like 乎許自 Wokozi, 許牟麻呂 Komumaro, and 志許甫智 Sikopoti. This 


phonogram appears a few times on excavated tablets: 許智祖父 Grandfather 
Koti (MK 2808), 許曽倍大魚 Kosobe OPOWO (MK 11677). 

This phonogram is used 154 times in Kojiki: 訓常云登許 ‘The reading for 
the graph 常 is toko’ (KG). 鹽許袁呂許袁呂迩畫鳴而 SIPO koworo koworo 
ni KAKINASITE ‘and stirred up the sea water with a swish swish...’ (KG). 亦名天 
之忍許呂別 ‘Another name is AME [NO] OSIkoro WAKE’ (KG). 

KK 60 

美母呂能 mimoro no The moor of Ōiko 

曾能多迦紀那流 sono takakwi naru in the highlands of 

意富韋古賀波良 opowikwo ga para Mount Mimoro— 

意富韋古賀 opowikwo ga like its name 

波良迩阿流 para ni aru there are large boars 

岐毛牟加布 kimwo mukapu with hearts opposite their livers. 

許許呂袁陀迩賀 kokoro wo dani ka Could you not at least 

阿比淤母波受阿良牟 apiomopazu aramu think of me in that heart? 

This phonogram is used in four annotational notes and in 13 poems in Nihon 
shoki: 訛、此云興許奈磨盧 “ ‘corruption (in speech)’ is read yokonamaru” 
(NSG). 

NSK 70 

於裒企彌烏 opokimi wo They exiled the great ruler 

志摩珥波夫利 sima ni paburi to a distant island. 

布儺阿摩利 punaamari The boat will be full, 

異餓幣利去牟鋤 igapyeri komu zo and she will return to me. 

和餓哆々瀰由梅 wa ga tatami yume So purify all the mats. 

去等烏許曾 koto wo koso ‘The mats’ are my words, 

哆多瀰等異泮梅 tatami to ipame but that is not what I meant. 

和餓菟摩烏由梅 wa ga tuma wo yume Stay clean and pure, my spouse. 

This phonogram was also popular in Man’yōshū, appearing 598 times in the 
anthology. 

MYS 8 

熟田津尓 NIKITATU ni When I was about to board 

船乗世武登 PUNANORAsemu to a ship at Nikita Port, waiting 

月待者 TUKWI MATEBA for the moon, the tide came in 

潮毛可奈比沼 SIPO mo kanapiNU allowing us to depart. 

今者許藝乞菜 IMA PA kogiIDE NA Shall we not row out presently? 

 

既 


OJ: ko OC: *kəts 

LH: kɨs > kɨj EMC: kɨj GO: ke KN: ki 

NOM: NA SV: ký, kí SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram also belongs to the PBS, and mainly transcribes ke. There 
are exceptions to this reading, and I have felt obliged to place that here, under ko. 
There is some strong internal evidence in Shoki that supports this reading. In the 
fifth year of Kinmei, the name 許勢臣 Kose OMI appears. Right after this there 
is a quote from Paekche ponki, a Paekche record that does not survive. In that 
quote the same name appears as 既酒臣 Kose OMI. On this evidence I place 既 
here. 


Another example appears in the record of Keitai. There the name 既殿奚 
Ko Dinkye appears, and this name is surprisingly close to the name in the second 
year of Kinmei: 古殿奚 Ka Dinkye. This appears to present a problem, as 古 is 
used to transcribe OJ kwo, but as this is a Paekche usage and presumably from an 
older stratum of Old Chinese, it is possible that this usage is based on the Later 
Han reading kɑ, with a mid, low, unrounded vowel, close to [ə]. 

 

去 


OJ: ko OC: *khah 

LH: khɨɑh EMC: khɨə GO: ko KN: kio 

NOM: khứ, khử SV: khứ, khử SK: ke 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. Concerning this graph, Ōno (1962:159) 
notes, “This graph is somewhat noteworthy....去 has few strokes and would 
seem to have been a good candidate to transcribe ko, but it was not a popular 
graph, and since it lacked substance, it is believed that (the usage of) this graph 
was overwhelmed by the use of 許.” It is unclear what “lack(ing) substance (重 
厚さを欠ける)” means, and how such a feature figures into the use of a 
phonogram. 

This phonogram appears in documents preserved in Shōsōin, transcribing the 
name 出雲部志去賣 IDUMWOBYE Sikomye. Interestingly this phonogram also 
appears in Izumo fudoki, transcribing 去豆乃意宇郡 Kodu no Ou District, and a 
personal name 伊去美 Ikomi. 

This phonogram appears four times in the poetry in Nihon shoki. 

NSK 69 

阿資臂紀能 asipikwi no Weary from climbing 

椰摩娜烏菟勾利 yamada wo tukuri I cultivated mountain land. 

椰摩娜箇彌 yamadakami The mountain being high, 

斯哆媚烏和之勢 sitabwi wo wasise I buried irrigation pipes. 

志哆那企貳 sita naki ni Thus I cry to myself. 

和餓儺勾菟摩 wa ga naku tuma I weep for my spouse— 

箇哆儺企貳 kata naki ni and I whimper. 

和餓儺勾菟摩 wa ga naku tuma I cry for my spouse. 

去鐏去會 kozo koso It was last night 

椰主區泮娜布例 yasuku pada pure that our flesh calmly touched. 

This phonogram appears four times in Man’yōshū. In the following poem it 
appears twice. 

MYS 4390 

牟浪他麻乃 muratama no Having made a firm promise, 

久留尓久枳作之 kuru ni kugi sasi as a door pivoting on a nail— 

加多米等之 katametosi like a cluster of jewels, 

以母加去々里波 imo ga kokoro pa my beloved’s heart will 

阿用久奈米加母 aywokuname kamo probably not be moved. 

 

巨 


OJ: ko OC: *ɡwaʔ 

LH: ɡɨɑʔ or ɡyaʔ EMC: ɡɨə GO: go KN: kio 

NOM: cự, cựa SV: cự SK: ke 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The use of this graph is fairly rare, 
mainly appearing in personal names. The two most popular names with this 
phonogram are the family names of Kose (巨勢) and Koma (巨麻). The earliest 
datable example appears on a wooden document with the following inscription: 
巨勢郷…養老□年十月 ‘Kose Village...10th month of X year of Yōrō (717– 
724)’ [MK 12654]. 

All 38 examples of this phonogram in Nihon shoki are used exclusively to 
represent the surname Kose. The same is true for Man’yōshū, where the 
phonogram 巨 appears 15 times, 10 of which represent the name Kose. Below is 
an example where 巨 is used to represent ko in other words. 

MYS 3638 

巨礼也己能 kore ya kono This is it! 

名尓於布奈流門能 NA ni opu NARUTWO no The fishing maidens 

宇頭之保尓 udusipo ni who cut the gem weed 

多麻毛可流登布 tamamo karu topu in the swirling tide at 

安麻乎等女杼毛 ama wotoMYEdomo the renowned place of Naruto. 

 

居 


OJ: ko OC: *ka 

LH: kɨɑ(h) EMC: kɨə GO: ko KN: kio 

NOM: cư SV: cư SK: ke, kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. As noted under ke, 居 is used to 
transcribe ke in the oldest stratum of documents dealing with Japanese. The 
earliest that we can date the use of this phonogram to transcribe ko is perhaps the 
early Asuka era. This phonogram appears a few times on mokkan: 尾治部加之 
居 OPARIBYE Kasiko (MK 2752). 

This phonogram is found in three annotational notes, and seven times in the 
poetry of Shoki: 事瑕、此云居騰作柯 “ ‘break a contract’ is read kotosaka” 
(NSG). It also appears four times in the following poem. 

NSK 7 

于儾能 uda no In the high 

多伽機珥 takakwi ni fort of Uda 

辭藝和奈破蘆 sigi wana paru a trap for snipe I set 

和餓末菟夜 wa ga matu ya and as I waited— 

辭藝破佐夜羅孺 sigi pa sayarazu it did not catch a snipe. 

伊殊區波辭 isukupasi What it did capture 

區旎羅佐夜離 kudira sayari were two intrepid hawks. 

固奈瀰餓 kwonami ga If your first wife 

那居波佐麼 na kopasaba asks for a side dish, 

多智曾麼能 tatisoba no cut her slices of meat 

未廼那鷄句塢 mwi no nakyeku wo with almost no meat— 

居氣辭被惠禰 kokwisipwiwene barren, like the hawthorn. 

宇破奈利餓 upanari ga If your favorite wife 

那居波佐麼 na kopasaba asks for a side dish, 

伊智佐介幾 itisakakwi cut her many slices of meat 


未廼於朋鷄句塢 mwi no opokyeku wo like the hisakaki fruit— 

居氣儾被惠禰 kokwidapwiwene blessed in abundance. 

This phonogram is used only once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 1723 

河蝦鳴 KAPADU NAKU Like those roots of the willows 

六田乃河之 MUTUTA no KAPA NO at the river of Mutsuta 

川楊乃 KAPA YAGWI no where the toads croak, 

根毛居侶雖見 NEmokoro MIREDO though I look at them longingly, 

不飽河鴨 AKANU KAPA KAMO I do not tire of staring at them. 

 

虚 


OJ: ko OC: *ha 

LH: hɨɑ EMC: xjwo GO: ko KN: kio 

NOM: hư, hơ SV: hư SK: he 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram appears once in the 
annotational notes, and 34 times in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 厳矛此云伊箇之 
倍虚 “ ‘Ritual broad-axe’ is ikasi poko” (NSG). 

NSK 44 

瀰儺曾虚赴 mina sokopu Who will look after 

於瀰能烏苔咩烏 omi no wotomye wo this maiden, my subject 

多例揶始儺播務 tare yasinapamu catching fish? 

This phonogram also appears twice in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 194 

所虚故 soko YUWE NI Therefore, unable to soothe 

名具鮫兼天 NAguSAMEKANEte your feelings you wondered 

氣田敷藻 keDASIKU MO if you would meet him 

相屋常念而 APU YA TO OMOPITE on the great plains of Ochi 

玉垂乃 TAMADARE no where the jewels hang down, 

越能大野之 woti no OPONWO NO your jeweled skirts drenched 

旦露尓 ASA TUYU ni with the morning dew, 

玉裳者埿打 TAMAMO PA PIDUTI and your robes soaked 

夕霧尓 YUPUGWIRI ni with the evening mists…. 

 

忌 


OJ: ko OC: *ɡəh 

LH: ɡɨəh EMC: ɡɨ GO: gi KN: ki 

NOM: kỵ, cữ, kiêng SV: kỵ, kị SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS and appears only in Man’yōshū, and then 
only twice in the same powerful poem of jealousy. 

MYS 3270 

刺将焼 SASI YAKAMU I spread out a ripped straw mat 

小屋之四忌屋尓 WOYA NO sikoYA ni I would rather just discard 

掻将棄 KAKI UTEMU in the digusting little hut 

破薦乎敷而 YAREGOMO wo SIKITE I would rather burn, 

所挌将折 UTIWORAMU and because you, my lord, are 

鬼之四忌手乎 SIKO NO sikoTE wo using that filthy arm of hers, 

指易而 SASI KAPETE bent to form a pillow, 


将宿君故 NURAMU KIMI YUWE and sleeping together— 

赤根刺 AKANE SASU how I have mourned you 

晝者終尓 PIRU PA SIMIRA ni all the day long 

野干玉之 NUBATAMA NO as the sun has pierced the sky, 

夜者須柄尓 YWO PA suGARA ni and all the night long, 

此床乃 KONO TOKO no black as pitch, 

比師跡鳴左右 pisi TO NARU MADE until this bed of ours 

嘆鶴鴨 NAGEKITURU KAMO has cried out in pain. 

The power in this poem written by a vexed wife hinges on the parallelism 
with the word siko ‘ugly, filthy,’ represented twice with 四忌 ‘four (times)- 
resent.’ 

 

擧 


OJ: ko OC: *kaʔ 

LH: kɨɑʔ EMC: kɨə GO: ko KN: kio 

NOM: cử, cỡ, cở SV: cử SK: ke 

Usage / History: 

I place this phonogram in the LJS. This graph only appears in Nihon shoki 
and Harima fudoki. In Harima fudoki it is used to transcribe a name 志擧乎命 
Sikowo [NO] MIKOTO and an abbreviated form of the name, 志擧 Siko. 

This phonogram appears five times in the annotational notes and 14 times in 
the poetry of Nihon shoki: 灼然、此云以椰知擧 “ ‘Brilliant’ is read iyatiko” 
(NSG). 

NSK 108 

武舸都烏爾 mukatuwo ni On the peak over there 

陀底屢制囉我 tateru sera ga that person standing 

儞古泥擧曾 nikwode koso with soft hands— 

倭我底烏騰羅毎 wa ga te wo torame he should take my hand. 

拕我佐基泥 ta ga sakwide These dry, cracked hands, 

作基泥曾母野 sakwide so moya who would take my hand 

倭我底騰羅須謀野 wa ga te torasu mo ya in his own hands? 

 

莒 


OJ: ko OC: *kaʔ 

LH: kɨɑʔ EMC: kɨə LMC: kyə GO: ko KN: kio 

NOM: NA SV: cứ, cữ, cử SK: ke 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the CBS. This is a somewhat rare usage, appearing 
only in Nihon shoki, found twice in the annotational notes, and three times in the 
poetry: 衫子此云莒呂母能古 “ ‘Child of robe’ is koromo no kwo” (NSG). 

NSK 84 

野麻登陸儞 yamatopye ni What I long to see 

瀰我保指母能婆 migaposi mono pa is the palace of Tsunosashi, 

於尸農瀰能 osinumi no this fortress built so high 

莒能陀哿紀儺屢 kono takakwi naru in Oshinumi, in the vicinity 

都奴娑之能瀰野 tunwosasi no miya of the province of Yamato. 

 


據 


OJ: ko OC: *kah 

LH: kɨɑh EMC: kɨə LMC: kyə GO: ko KN: kio 

NOM: cớ, cứ SV: cứ SK: ke 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears six times in the poetry in 
Nihon shoki. 

NSK 3 

阿磨佐箇屢 amasakaru Having crossed over 

避奈菟謎廼 pinatu mye no the narrow, earthly straits, 

以和多邏素西渡 iwatarasu setwo the provincial maidens 

以嗣箇播箇柁輔智 isikapa kataputi stand on the banks of the river 

箇多輔智爾 kataputi ni on the banks of Ishikawa, 

阿彌播利和柁嗣 ami pariwatasi spreading out their nets. 

妹慮豫嗣爾 mero yosi ni Pull in those nets 

豫嗣豫利據禰 yosi yorikone by pulling on the meshes! 

以嗣箇播箇柁輔智 isikapa kataputi On the banks of the Ishikawa. 

 

渠 


OJ: ko OC: * ɡa 

LH: ɡɨɑ EMC: ɡɨə LMC: kɦiə GO: go KN: kio 

NOM: cừ, gừa, khờ SV: cừ SK: ke 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears only in Nihon shoki, 
appearing once in the annotational notes, and four times in the poetry: 醜此云之 
渠 “ ‘Ugly’ is siko” (NSG). 

NSK 109 

波魯波魯儞 parwo parwo ni Far off in the distance 

渠騰曾枳擧喩屢 koto so kikoyuru you can hear someone speaking 

之麻能野父播羅 sima no yabupara in the thicket on the island plain. 

 

木 


OJ: ko OC: *môk 

LH: mok EMC: məwk GO: moku KN: moku 

NOM: mộc, mọc, mốc SV: mộc SK: mok 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind ko ‘tree,’ the bound form of kwi ‘tree.’ 
This usage appears in Kojiki in the name 木幡村 KOPATA Village (KG). 

There are several examples of this usage in Nihon shoki, the name of a deity, 
葉木國 野 尊 PAKO KUNINWO [NO] MIKOTO, which must have been 
somewhat confusing, as this note follows: 葉木國、此云播擧矩爾 “ ‘leaf-tree 
land’ is to be read pako kuni” (NSG). 

There are only eight examples of this in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3792 

死者木苑 SINABA KOSO You will surely avoid it 

相不見在目 APIMIZU ARAME if you were to die, 

生而在者 IKITE ARABA but if you live on 

白髪子等丹 SIRWOKAMI KWORA NI then you young ones 

不生在目八方 OPWIZARAME YAMO will grow grey hair. 

 


興 


OJ: ko, kogo OC: *həŋ 

LH: hɨŋ EMC: xiŋ GO: gou KN: kiou 

NOM: hăng, hứng SV: hưng, hứng SK: hung 

Usage / History: 

I place this phonogram in the LJS. A personal name preserved in the 
documents in Shōsōin is 興志 Kogosi. On a wooden document excavated from 
the Nara capital, a fragment of what may be a personal name contains the same 
part of this name: 句興志 kugosi (not numbered). In Nihon shoki the name 興 
志 Kogosi appears (NSG), as well as 興台産靈 Kogoto MUSUPI (NSG), the 
name of a deity supposedly fathering the Nakatomi family. 

This phonogram appears once in Man’yōshū used for ko. 

MYS 3274 

為須部乃 SEMU suBYE no As I do not know 

田付𠮧不知 TADUKI WO SIRANI what I should do, 

石根乃 IPAGANE no in the morning I go out through 

興凝敷道乎 kogoSIKI MITI wo the gate where the rock floor 

石床笶 IPATOKO NO spreads out like roots 

根延門𠮧 NEBAYERU KADO WO and stand along the road 

朝庭 ASITA NIPA that is jagged with rocks, 

出居而嘆 IDE WITE NAGEKI mourning…. 

 

極 


OJ: koko, kogo OC: *ɡək 

LH: ɡɨk EMC: ɡik GO: goku KN: kioku 

NOM: cực SV: cực SK: kuk 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only twice in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2400 

伊田何 ide NANI KA Why do I long for you 

極太甚 kokoda PANAPADA so incredibly intensely 

利心 TWOGOKORO NO that I almost lose my mind? 

及失念 USURU MADE OMOPU Surely it is 

戀故 KWOPWI YUWE NI KOSO due to love. 

The second example assumes the reader will treat the second syllable as 
voiced: 

MYS 322 

極此疑 kogosi KAMO And you stood 

伊豫能高嶺乃 iyo no TAKANE no on Izaniwa Hill, 

射狭庭乃 IzaNIPA no a high peak in Iyo 

崗尓立而 WOKA ni TATASITE that is rugged and steep.... 

 

今 


OJ: komu OC: *kəm 

LH: kɨm EMC: kim GO: komu KN: kimu 

NOM: kim SV: kim SK: kum 

Usage / History: 

I place this phonogram in the PBS. This dating is based on the usage found in 
the inscription on the Suda Hachiman mirror (perhaps the sixth century), where 


we find the phrase 穢人今州利 *kɨm-tśu-lih “Komturi, a person of Wai.” This 
usage also appears once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 2927 

浦觸而 URABURETE If I could sleep again, 

可例西袖𠮧 kareNISI SWODE WO sleeves interwined with him 

又巻者 MATA MAKABA who departed, listless, 

過西戀以 SUGWINISI KWOPWI i will the yearning that has passed 

乱今可聞 MIDAREkomu kamo come back to me muddied? 

 

金 


OJ: komu OC: *kəm 

LH: kɨm EMC: kim GO: komu, gomu KN: kimu 

NOM: kim, ghim, găm SV: kim SK: kum 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage appears only in Man’yōshū, 
and then only once. 

MYS 3322 

門座 KADWO NI WISI The handsome male 

郎子内尓 IRATUKWO UTI ni who stood at the gate, 

雖至 ITARU TOMO if he should have come inside 

痛之戀者 ITAKUsi KWOPWI PA and yearned for me anxiously— 

今還金 IMA KAPYERIkomu maybe he would have returned. 

 

感 


OJ: komu OC: *kə̂ mʔ 

LH: kəmʔ EMC: kəm GO: komu KN: kamu 

NOM: cảm SV: cảm SK: kam 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage appears in a toponym 感玖 
Komuku found in the Nintoku record in Nihon shoki. This usage also appears in 
Shoku Nihongi, in the toponym 度 感 Twokomu (699.7.19), an island 
supposedly in the same general area as Amami. 

 

紺 


OJ: komu OC: *kə̂ ms < *kləms 

LH: kəmh EMC: kəm GO: komu KN: kamu 

NOM: NA SV: cám SK: kam 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in a document from Shōsōin 
where the toponym 紺口郷 Komuku Village is found. As Ōno (1977:105) 
points out, this phonogram also was used in several early Buddhist temple 
names: 紺園 Komu-EN and 紺殿 Komu-DEN. 

 

近 


OJ: kono OC: *ɡənʔ 

LH: ɡɨnʔ EMC: ɡɨn GO: kon, gon KN: kin 

NOM: cận,gần SV: cận SK: kun 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The earliest datable example of this 
usage appears in the Atago District register of 726. It appears in the name 近江 


侶 KonoYEro. The same usage appears in Izumo fudoki, in the word 近志呂 
konosiro ‘gizzard shad.’ 

 

乞 


OJ: koti OC: *khət 

LH: khɨt EMC: khɨt GO: koti KN: kotu 

NOM: khất, khắt, gất SV: khất SK: kel, kul, kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage appears four times in 
Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2768 

葦多頭乃 ASItadu no Like the white sedge 

颯入江乃 SAWAKU IRIYE no at the inlet where the cranes 

白菅乃 SIRASUGE no from the reeds clamor in flight, 

知為等 SIRASEMU TAME to oh the clamor of the rumors 

乞痛鴨 koti TAKARU KAMO that are trying to reach you. 

 

久 


OJ: ku < kə OC: *kwəʔ *[k]wəʔ§ 

LH: kuʔ > kɨu EMC: kuw GO: ku KN: kiu 

NOM: cửu SV: cửu SK: kwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. Though I place the graph here under the 
reading of ku, there is evidence that on the peninsula it originally transcribed ko, 
and with vowel raising that occurred later in Early Middle Chinese, this graph 
was used to transcribe ku. Consider the following rare information from Nihon 
shoki: in Book 19 the name 久嗟旱岐 is glossed kosa no kanki. This name is 
also mentioned in Shaku Nihongi, written and glossed as 久嵯旱岐 ク(コ)サノ 
(Onoda 1986:457). Other than the mis-transcription of 嗟 as 嵯, I believe there 
is sufficient evidence to see 久 transcribing /kə/ instead of /ku/ in an earlier era. 
This fact is supported by the OC reconstruction of this graph: *kwəʔ. I have 
transcribed the earlier peninsular usage thus. 

The phonogram 久 does not appear in Koguryŏ or Paekche inscriptions, but 
several examples appear on the Namsan stele of Silla: 貴干久利城 *kɨu(s)-kɑnkɨ-
li Fortress; 小舎文尺久 *mun-tshiak-kɨ of the 13th rank. One of the earliest 
known examples of this phonogram suggesting a connection with Paekche 
appears in the record of Ōjin in Shoki. The 37th year mentions two people from 
Koguryŏ: 久礼波 Ku-re-pa, and 久礼志 Ku-re-si. 

This phonogram 久 is also part of the Suiko era corpus. In Jōgū Shōtoku 
hōō teisetsu the name of Great King Kinmei is recorded as: 阿米久爾於志波留 
支広庭 Amekuni Osiparuki PIRONIPA. This phonogram is prominent in the 
liturgies: 平久安久聞看登 皇 大御 神 等乎 称辞竟 奉久登 白 TAPIRAKEku 
YASURAKEku KIKOSIMESE to SUME OPOMIKAMWITATI wo TATEPEGOTO 
WOPEMATURAku to MAWOSU “Please accept (these offerings) peacefully and 
tranquilly, which words I have now offered in prayer before the great imperial 
deities” (NT 2). This phonogram is popular on inscriptions found on mokkan: 久 
己利魚 ‘the kukori fish’ (MK 451), 久比万呂 Kupimaro (unnumbered tablet), 
久利久者牟 kuri kuPAmu ‘We will eat chestnuts’ (MKK 2:11). 

This is the primary phonogram used in Kojiki: 


KK 91 

久佐加辨能 kusakabye no The great broad-leafed 

許知能夜麻登 koti no yama to oak trees that grow so thickly 

多多美許母 tatamikomo in the glen 

幣具理能夜麻能 pyeguri no yama no between this mountain 

許知碁知能 kotigoti no here from Kusakabe 

夜麻能賀比爾 yama no kapi ni and that mountain 

多知邪加由流 tatizakayuru there from Heguri 

波毘呂久麻加斯 pabirokumakasi of woven-mats in layers— 

母登爾波 moto nipa at the base bamboo grows 

伊久美陀氣淤斐 ikumidake opwi with its branches intertwining. 

須惠幣爾波 suwepye nipa At the crown bamboo grows 

多斯美陀氣淤斐 tasimidake opwi thickly among the leaves. 

伊久美陀氣 ikumidake Like intertwining bamboo 

伊久美波泥受 ikumi pa nezu we did not sleep together. 

多斯美陀氣 tasimidake Like thickly growing bamboo 

多斯爾波韋泥受 tasi nipa nezu we certainly did not sleep. 

能知母久美泥牟 noti mo kuminemu We will sleep together later, 

曾能淤母比豆麻 sono omopi duma my beloved whom I think of. 

阿波禮 apare Alas. 

This phonogram is used very sparingly in Nihon shoki, only three times in 
annotational notes, and twice in poetry: 洞、此云久岐 “ ‘cave’ this is read kuki” 
(NSG). 

NSK 22 

夜摩苔波 yamato pa Yamato is 

區珥能摩倍邏摩 kuni no maporama the most prosperous— 

多々儺豆久 tatanaduku a land ringed by 

阿烏伽枳 awokaki mountains arrayed 

夜摩許莽例屢 yama komoreru as a green, rolling fence. 

夜摩苔之于屢破試 yamato si urupasi Yes, Yamato is beautiful. 

This is also the primary phonogram in Man’yōshū to transcribe ku, appearing 
1229 times in the anthology. 

MYS 3578 

武庫能浦乃 mukwo no URA no I parted with you, my lord, 

伊里江能渚鳥 iriYE no SUDORI whom I have brooded over 

羽具久毛流 pagukumoru like the birds of the shoals 

伎美乎波奈礼弖 kimi wo panarete at the inlet to Muko Bay, 

古非尓之奴倍之 kwopwi ni sinu besi and will likely die of longing. 

The cursive form of this phonogram later became the basis for hiragana く, 
while the abbreviated version became katakana ク. 

 

跪 


OJ: ku OC: *ɡoiʔ or *khoiʔ 

LH: ɡyaiʔ or khyaiʔ EMC: ɡwiə GO: guwi KN: kuwi 

NOM: quì SV: quị SK: kwey 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS, and phonologically is closely related to 
垝 (see below). The graph 跪 likely fell out of use, because of the semantics, as 
it means ‘to kneel down.’ 

The phonogram 跪 appears several times in Shoki: a personal name 沙沙奴 
跪 Sa-sa-nwo-ku. The NKBT editors wish to read this Sasanako, but this is 
somewhat anachronistic. My reading above is based on third-century LH. There 
is also another name, 己麻奴跪 read komanaku (but should probably be ko-manwo-
ku). Again, the NKBT editors wish the last half to be read -nako. 
Interestingly, Shaku Nihongi preserves the reading for these names as follows: 
沙々奴跪 ササトク, and 己麻奴跪 コマトク. 

 

垝 


OJ: ku OC: *kwaiʔ 

LH: kyaiʔ EMC: kjwieʔ GO: kuwi KN: kuwi 

NOM: NA SV: cù SK: kwey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Inariyama tumulus 
sword inscription. This graph appears in the following name: 意冨比垝, which 
scholars tend to interpret as Opo pikwo (cf. Murayama and Miller 1979:421). 
Notice that if we interpret the last half of this name based on LH we get pi-kwa-i, 
which looks odd. The final -i is surely the suffix vowel found so often in early 
Japanese. It is possible that this is a pre-Old Japanese form: *pi-kura-i > *pi-kurai 
(> *pi-kwo), which sounded to the ear as -w- (cf. Bentley 2008:19–20). 

The nuclear vowel in this graph seems to be mid. Compare this graph with 
跪. For the time being, I have grouped both graphs under /ku/. Again, semantics 
appears to have been the problem that kept this phonogram from being used by 
the native Japanese. The graph 垝 means to break down, to crumble to pieces. 
Perhaps the Paekche scholars later altered this usage to 跪, to avoid inauspicious 
results. This second choice, however, means to bow down, to kneel, conjuring up 
thoughts of obeisance, a servile attitude the Japanese would have wanted to avoid. 

 

苦 


OJ: ku OC: *khâʔ or *khâh 

LH: khɑʔ or khah EMC: khɔ GO: ku KN: ko 

NOM: khổ, khó, cỏ SV: khổ SK: kwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. The Chinese reconstructions with the 
Sino-Xenic data make one wonder if this is not actually kwo, though the Later 
Han reconstruction yields khɑʔ, which is closer to the Old Chinese. A good 
example of this graph appears in the record of Kinmei (Ienaga et al. 1986.2:112), 
transcribing the name 苦都 Ku-tu. A variant record has his name as 谷智, 
which in EMC would be kəwktri, possibly Kokti. It is possible that a peninsular 
ko [kɔ] underwent vowel raising to ku in Japan. This phenomenon requires 
further elucidation. 

This phonogram appears twice in the annotational notes of Shoki: 頭邊此云 
摩苦羅陛, “ ‘By the head’ is read makurapye” (NSG). 

The phonogram 苦 also appears 39 times in Man’yōshū, but many of these 
are dual usages. The ancient poets knew that the Chinese phonology matched 


closely with the Japanese meaning (苦 ku means ‘painful’), and used this 
phonogram in a dual role. It is thus important to notice also that this phonogram 
is never used in Books 5 or 15, both written primarily in phonograms. 

MYS 4075 

安必意毛波受 apiomopazu How strange it is 

安流良牟伎美乎 aruramu kimi wo that I should continue 

安夜思苦毛 ayasiku mo to lament for you, one who 

奈氣伎和多流香 nagekiwataru KA does not return my affection. 

比登能等布麻泥 pito no topu made People even ask me. 

It surely is not a coincidence that this example uses 苦 where someone is 
hurt or pained over love. 

 

句 


OJ: ku OC: *kô 

LH: ko EMC: kəw GO: ku KN: kou 

NOM: cú, câu SV: cú, câu SK: kwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. Regarding the phonology of this graph, 
both the LH and EMC readings make it appear that the vowel should be mid or 
back, and not high back [o ~ ə vs. u]. However, both the SK and Vietnamese data 
argue for a high, back vowel. Consider that in Nom the graph 𤵆 is khú. 

There is also a philological problem that must be addressed. Were there two 
phonograms used in Nihon shoki, 句 and 勾, both read ku as some may be 
tempted to believe? It seems to me that there was only one phonogram, 句, and 
the other phonogram, 勾, was nothing but a vulgarized version of the first (cf. 
Shirakawa 1982:61). Looking at the Kwangkaytho stele, consider that 句 never 
appears, but the graph 勾 appears seven times: 勾牟城 *ko-mu fortress, 勾拏 
太王 Great King *ko-niɑ, heir to the throne, and 勾満城 *ko-man fortress. 

Mori (1991:216–217) notes that 句 appears 11 times in Shoki’s poetry 
(NSK 1, 5, 7, 15, 18, 41), while 勾 appears in the poetry 14 times (NSK 6, 9, 14, 
20, 29, 65, 69, 71, 102, 103). Notice further that the two phonograms never 
appear in the same poem together. I do not doubt that both phonograms appear in 
the texts, even in the original manuscripts. What I am skeptical about is that there 
were two distinct phonograms. Therefore, I view 句 as the orthodox graph, and 
勾 the vulgar. 

The earliest datable example of this phonogram in Japan appears on a 
wooden tablet from the ruins of the Fujiwara Palace (fl. 694–710): 川勾里 
KAPAku Village (MK 1382), though the reading is uncertain. The use of the older 
graph 里 demonstrates this writing predated the introduction of the newer 郷 
‘village’ of the Taihō code of 701. 

As noted above, this phonogram appears frequently in Nihon shoki, three 
times in the annotational notes, and 25 times in poetry: 排別、此云飫時和句 
“ ‘split the rocks apart’ is read osiwaku” (NSG). 

NSK 41 

訶羅怒烏 karanwo wo The ship Karano 

之褒珥椰枳 sipo ni yaki was burned to make salt. 

之餓阿摩離 si ga amari The leftover wood 

虚等珥菟句離 koto ni tukuri was used to make a lute. 


訶枳譬句梛 kaku piku ya When I strum on it 

由羅能斗能 yura no two no the sound is wonderful, 

斗那訶能異句離珥 twonaka no ikuri ni as the swaying of seaweed 

敷例多菟 puretatu on a rock jutting 

那豆能紀能 nadu no kwi no out in the Yura Straits— 

佐椰佐椰 saya saya saya saya. 

 

玖 


OJ: ku OC: *kwəʔ 

LH: ku > kɨu EMC: kuw GO: ku KN: kiu 

NOM: NA SV: cửu SK: kwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The usage of this phonogram was 
influenced by the popularity of 久. This phonogram appears quite often in Kojiki, 
sometimes making people believe there may have been a difference in 
pronunciation with 久 and 玖. As Ōno (1977:185) points out, 久 is the favored 
phonogram, used 195 times through out the text of Kojiki, while 玖 is used 36 
times. Ōno’s own conclusions are that 久 was a standard usage, while 玖 was 
reserved for literary tension, the so-called skillful use of phonograms (1977:185– 
186). Needless to say, it is very difficult to reach such complex conclusions 
based only on this vague ratio (195:36). What most have failed to notice is that 
the majority of the usages of this graph are confined to the second book of Kojiki. 
This usage may be nothing more than personal preference of an earlier 
historiographer. 

Examples of this usage in Kojiki include 伊多玖佐夜藝帝阿理祁理 itaku 
sayagite ari nari ‘We hear (the land of Yamato) is terribly unruly’ (KG). 阿佐米 
余玖 asame yoku ‘seeing an auspicious sign in the morning’ (KG), and 意富夜 
麻登玖迩阿禮比賣命 Opo Yamato Kuniare Pimye (KG). 

KK 52 

淤岐幣迩波 okipye ni pa There are boats 

袁夫泥都羅羅玖 wobune turaraku lined up out in the offing. 

久漏邪夜能 kurwozaya no Black like a sheath 

摩佐豆古和藝毛 masadukwo wagimwo my beautiful beloved, 

玖迩幣玖陀良須 kunipye kudarasu she heads for her home. 

This phonogram also appears four times in the annotational notes, and six 
times in the poetry of Shoki: 泳宮、此云區玖利能彌揶 “ ‘the Kukuri Palace’ 
is read kukuri no miya” (NSG). 

NSK 56 

于羅遇破能紀 uragupa no kwi The beautiful mulberry branch 

豫屢志士枳 yorumasiziki cannot approach, 

箇破能區莽愚莽 kapa no kumaguma driven here and there 

豫呂朋譬喩玖伽茂 yoropopi yuku kamo by the bends in the river. 

于羅愚破能紀 uragupa no kwi The beautiful mulberry branch. 

This phonogram appears twice in Man’yōshū, once in the place name 玖河 
郡 Kuga District, and then once in a poem. 

MYS 3876 

豊國 TOYO KUNI NO I wonder if my beloved 

企玖乃池奈流 kiku no IKE naru has gotten her sleeves wet 


菱之宇礼乎 PISI NO ure wo trying to pick 

採跡也妹之 TUMU TO ya IMWO NO the water chestnuts of 

御袖所沾計武 MISWODE NUREkyemu Kiku Pond in Toyo Province. 

 

口 


OJ: ku OC: *khôʔ 

LH: khoʔ EMC: khəw GO: ku KN: kou 

NOM: khẩu SV: khẩu SK: kwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The oldest datable usage comes from the 
first book of Man’yōshū, poem 45: 隠口乃, KOMORI ku no “the hidden place.” 
This poem was written by Hitomaro when Prince Karu (軽皇子) lodged on the 
plain of Aki. Thus, we can date this poem before 697, before Prince Karu became 
Crown Prince (697.2), and before he became Emperor Monmu (697.8). Many of 
the examples of 口 in Man’yōshū appear in this epithet (隠口), which is a 
semantic play: hidden mouth = that which is hidden away, a hidden place. Not 
only does 口 have the phonogrammatic value of ku, but the graph calls to mind 
the ku of kuti ‘mouth.’ 

 

群 


OJ: ku, kuru OC: *ɡun < *C.qur§ 

LH: ɡun EMC: ɡun GO: gumu KN: kun 

NOM: quần, quằn SV: quần SK: kun 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The oldest datable example comes from 
726, found on a stone monument to the Mike Family in Takada Village in Ueno. 
The monument inscription starts: 上野国群馬郡下賛郷高田里三家, “UPENWO 
Province, Kuruma District....’ The traditional explanation is that 群 馬 
transcribes kunma, and it was written with a liquid -ru- to show the slurred 
pronunciation (cf. Ōno 1962:411–412). It should not be overlooked, however, 
that at an earlier stage, the Chinese pronunciation of 群 was liquid-final. This is 
also seen in Paekche transcriptions, where a Paekche place name with the 
element ‘moon’ (Middle Korean tol) in the name is transcribed as 珍 (OC *trər 
> LOC ʈin). Furthermore, notice that the Paekche name 波珍 in Nihon shoki is 
glossed as 波止利 patori in Shiki, showing that the graph 珍 retained the final 
liquid in this Korean transcription (cf. Bentley 2000). 

The single example in Man’yōshū appears in Book 10, where the graph 群 
is read ku: 

MYS 2130 

吾屋戸尓 WA GA YADWO ni The wild geese 

鳴之鴈哭 NAKIsi KARI GANE that had honked at my house 

雲上尓 KUMWO NO UPE ni are now honking above 

今夜喧成 KOYOPI NAKUNARU the clouds tonight. 

国方可聞遊群 KUNI PYE kamo yuku Perhaps they are headed home. 

 

丘 


OJ: ku OC: *khwə 

LH: khu EMC: khuw GO: ku KN: kiu 

NOM: kheo SV: khưu, khíu, vưu SK: kwu 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram appears only in 
Man’yōshū, and in only one poem. 

MYS 185 

水傳 MINATUTAPU The azaleas among the boulders 

礒乃浦廻乃 ISWO no URAMWI no where the water snakes 

石上乍自 IPA TUTUzi around the rocks of the lake 

木丘開道乎 moku SAKU MITI wo are in full bloom by the path— 

又将見鴨 MATA MO MIMU KAMO will I ever see these again? 

 

九 


OJ: ku OC: *kuʔ 

LH: kuʔ EMC: kuw GO: ku KN: kiu 

NOM: cûu SV: cûu SK: kwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only in Man’yōshū, then only 
three times. In the following poem numerals figure prominently. 

MYS 2581 

言云者 KOTO NI IPYEBA To say this verbally 

三々二田八酢四 MIMI ni TAYASUsi it sounds simple to the ears. 

小九毛 SUKUNAku mo At least I am thinking 

心中二 KOKORO NO NAKA ni that in my heart 

我念羽奈九二 WA GA OMOPOnaku ni it is not so simple. 

It should be pointed out that there is also a visual aspect of this poem, where 
the numbers tell a rather amusing story: to say this verbally / 3+3+2=8 fields, 
four (things of) vinegar / nine little hairs / in my heart there are two / I thought 
‘why the feather?’ Notice that the number 9 appears twice. 

 

鳩 


OJ: ku OC: *ku 

LH: ku EMC: kuw GO: ku KN: kiu 

NOM: cưu SV: cưu SK: kwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only in Man’yōshū, and then 
only once. 

MYS 1655 

高山之 TAKAYAMA NO I would like to say 

菅葉之努藝 SUGA NO PA sinwogi the weight of love has vanished, 

零雪之 PURU SIMWO NO like melting frost that descended, 

消跡可曰毛 KENU TO ka IPAmo weighing down the leaves on 

戀乃繁鶏鳩 KWOPWI no SIGEkyeku the sedge of the high mountain. 

 

孔 


OJ: ku, kugu OC: *khôŋʔ 

LH: khoŋʔ EMC: khəwŋ GO: kuu KN: kou 

NOM: khổng SV: khổng SK: kwong 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The earliest datable example of this 
appears in the Mino Census of 702: 孔西 Kuguse. There is also an example in 


the Jinmu record of Shoki where this graph transcribes ku: 孔舍衞坂 Kusawe 
Hill (NSG). 

 

倶 


OJ: ku OC: *ko 

LH: kɨo EMC: kuə LMC: kyə GO: gu KN: ku 

NOM: gù SV: câu, cu SK: kwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears 13 times in the 
annotational notes, and 52 times in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 背揮、此云志理 
幣提爾布倶 “ ‘Brandish a sword backhandedly (as one retreats)’ is read 
siripyede ni puku” (NSG). 

NSK 95 

婀嗚儞與志 awo ni yosi In the valley of 

乃樂能婆娑摩儞 nara no pasama ni the blue hills of Nara, 

斯々貳暮能 sisizi mono like beasts of prey, he lies 

瀰豆矩陛御暮梨 miduku pyegomori hidden by the banks— 

瀰儺曾々矩 mina sosoku a large catch of tuna, 

思寐能和倶吾嗚 sibi no wakugwo wo the young man, Shibi. 

阿娑理逗那偉能古 asaridunawi no kwo Boars, do not try to find him! 

This phonogram also appears in the imperial edicts of Shoku Nihongi. Edict 
number five (dated 724) has the following word twice: 牟倶佐加爾 mukusaka 
ni apparently meaning something close to ‘abundant, plentiful, wondrous.’ 

 

區 


OJ: ku OC: *kho 

LH: khuo EMC: khuə LMC: khyə GO: ku KN: ku 

NOM: khu, khù SV: khu SK: kwu 

Usage / History: 

I place this phonogram in the CBS. This graph appears 42 times in the poetry 
of Nihon shoki. 

NSK 62 

多莽耆破屢 tamakiparu Minister Uchi 

宇知能阿曾 uti no aso with the strong spirit— 

儺虚曾破 na koso pa it is you 

豫能等保臂等 yo no topo pito who have lived so long. 

儺虚曾波 na koso pa It is you 

區珥能那餓臂等 kuni no nagapito who is the elder of the land. 

阿耆豆辭莽 akitusima So I ask if you have heard 

揶莽等能區珥々 yamato no kuni ni of a goose having laid an egg 

箇利古武等 kari kwomu to in the dragonfly 

儺波企箇輸揶 na pa kikasu ya islands of Yamato? 

This graph also appears in a Man’yōshū chūshaku quote from the lost Hizen 
fudoki, which has the following poem: 

婀邏禮符縷 arare puru On the peak of Kishima 

耆資麼加多塏塢 kisima ga take wo where the hail pounds 

嵯峨紫彌台 sakasimi to the climb was so steep— 

區縒刀理我泥底 kusa tworikanete she could not grasp the grass 

伊母我提塢刀縷 imo ga te wo tworu so I held my beloved’s hand. 


While it is difficult to know if this poem is from the original Nara era Hizen 
fudoki, the orthography does remind one of the complicated phonograms selected 
for inclusion in Nihon shoki poetry. And while this poem is a variant of MYS 385, 
the orthography is so different that these two must be seen as different versions 
of the same poem. 

 

矩 


OJ: ku OC: *kwaʔ 

LH: kyɑʔ EMC: kuə LMC: kyə GO: ku KN: ku 

NOM: củ SV: củ SK: kwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. There are six examples in the 
annotational notes, and 28 examples in the poetry in Nihon shoki: 鞍橋、此云矩 
羅膩 “ ‘saddle-ridge’ is read kurazi”(NSG). 

NSK 122 

摩比邏矩都能 mapira kutu no The repeated attacks from Kure, 

倶例豆例於能 kure tureo no the truly flat capital on the river— 

幣陀乎邏賦 pyeta worapu she remains on the banks, 

倶能理歌理鵝 kunorikari ga that damn queen who is there. 

美和陀騰能理 miwata to nori He declared, “To the august sea!”— 

歌美烏能 kami wono with the captain’s axe. 

陛陀烏邏賦 pyeta worapu Yet she remains on the banks, 

倶能理歌理鵝 kunorikari ga that damn queen that is there. 

甲子騰 KWINOYE NE to It was said in the Kinoe ne year, 

和與騰美烏能 wa toyomi wono “Wa with its drooping axe....” 

陛陀烏邏賦 pyeta worapu And she remains on the banks, 

倶能理歌理鵝 kunorikari ga that damn queen who is there. 

 

絇 


OJ: ku OC: *ɡo 

LH: ɡɨo EMC: ɡuə LMC: kɦyə GO: gu KN: ku 

NOM: NA SV: cù SK: kwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears only in Shoki, and 
according to Mori (1991:216) only once. It appears in NSK 69, an Ingyō poem: 
阿資臂紀能・椰摩娜烏莵絇利asipikwi no / yamada wo tukuri “Making a 
mountain rice paddy, where our legs become cramped....” Ienaga et al. 
(1986.1:649) note that all manuscripts, other than the Kunaichō and Shaku 
Nihongi manuscripts, have 句. These two manuscripts have 絇. Ōno (1977:759), 
however, mentions that 絇 appears in NSK 69. The text of the NKBZ has 勾. 

The greatest problem I have faced is not with the variation of 句 > 勾, 
which is simply graphic variation, but in deciding where the radical 糸 came 
from. If this radical appeared somewhere else in the poetic stanza, an ‘eye-skip’ 
would likely be the problem. It is possible that 紀 in the first stanza influenced 
絇, but there are seven graphs in between. The phonogram, 菟, appears in two 
different manuscripts (Kunaichō and Kitano) as 兎, but this a simple alteration 
of a similar phonogram. It is quite plausible that this graph 絇 originally was not 
in Nihon shoki; however, because of the textual uncertainty, I have elected to 
include this phonogram (絇) in the dictionary with the above reservations. 


窶 


OJ: ku OC: *ɡroʔ 

LH: ɡuo EMC: ɡuə LMC: kɦyə GO: gu KN: ku 

NOM: cũ SV: cũ SK: kwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears only once in Shoki, but it is 
preserved in all manuscripts in its variant form: 寠. That single appearance is in 
the Shoki annotational notes: 磐裂此云以簸娑寠 “ ‘rock splitting’ is read 
ipasaku” (NSG). 

 

衢 


OJ: ku OC: *ɡwa 

LH: ɡyɑ EMC: ɡuə LMC: kɦyə GO: gu KN: ku 

NOM: cù SV: cù SK: kwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This graph only appears in Shoki, in the 
annotational notes twice: 倉下此云衢羅餌 “ ‘Lower storehouse’ is read kurazi” 
(NSG), 手抉此云多衢餌離 “ ‘A finger bowl’ is takuziri” (NSG). 

 

屨 


OJ: ku OC: *kroh 

LH: kuo EMC: kuə LMC: kyə GO: ku KN: ku 

NOM: NA SV: lủ, củ SK: kwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, appearing only twice in the same poem 
in Shoki. 

NSK 99 

柯羅屨儞嗚 kara kuni wo No matter what people 

以柯儞輔居等所 ika ni pu koto so may say about our land of Kara, 

梅豆羅古枳駄樓 medurakwo kitaru Mezurako has arrived. 

武哿左屨樓 mukasakuru Passing through the distant 

以祇能和駄唎嗚 iki no watari wo channel of Iki 

梅豆羅古枳駄樓 medurakwo kitaru Mezurako has at last arrived. 

 

來 


OJ: ku OC: *rə 

LH: lə EMC: ləj GO: rai KN: rai 

NOM: lai, lơi SV: lai SK: lai 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader the OJ word for ‘come,’ which could be 
either ku or ki, based on the conclusive or infinitive forms of the verb k-. The 
oldest datable usage of ku represented with 來 is in the record of Jinmu, where 
the Kumebye (ancient archers) are recorded as 來目部. Because it is difficult to 
date the proper names in Shoki, we must date the usages via other documents. 
Kojiki, which is believed to represent the court after the Suiko era, records the 
name as 久米直. Japan’s oldest genealogical register, Shinsen shōjiroku (814), 
records the name as 久目朝臣, reflecting the orthography of pre-Nara eras. 
Shoku Nihongi also records the name with the same spelling as Shōjiroku. This 
would seem to suggest that when Tenmu gave out new ranks in the 13th year of 
this reign (684), the family may have altered the phonograms of the name: 久米 
>來目. If this supposition is correct, then this usage comes from 684. 


The phonogram 來 also appears in Man’yōshū, used a total of 11 times in 
the poetry. 

MYS 27 

淑人乃 YOKI PITO no Good people of old took a good 

良跡吉見而 YOSI TO YOKU MITE look at this good place, 

好常言師 YOSI TO IPIsi saying it was good, Yoshino. 

芳野吉見与 YOSINWO YOKU MIyo You good people here, 

良人四来三 YOSI PITO YOKU MI take a good look at Yoshino. 

 

功 


OJ: kugu OC: *kôŋ 

LH: koŋ EMC: kəwŋ GO: kuu KN: kou 

NOM: công SV: công SK: kwong 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The earliest datable example appears in 
the Mino Census of 702: 功志 Kugusi and 功子賣 KuguKWOmye. 

 

菊 


OJ: kuku OC: *kuk 

LH: kuk EMC: kuwk LMC: kiwk GO: kuku KN: kiku 

NOM: cúc SV: cúc SK: kwuk 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. With the importation of LMC the word 
became kiku ‘chrysanthemum,’ which reading survives to this day. Examples 
with this phonogram are quite rare. One example appears in the first book of 
Nihon shoki: 菊理媛 Kukuri PIMYE. Another example appears in Shoku 
Nihongi: 菊多郡 Kukuta District (718.5.2). 

 

鞠 


OJ: kuku OC: *kuk 

LH: kuk EMC: kuwk GO: kuku KN: kiku 

NOM: cúc SV: cúc SK: kwuk 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It is extremely rare, and appears only in 
Shoku Nihongi: 鞠智城 Kukuti Fortress (698.5.25). 

 

君 


OJ: kuni, ku OC: *kun 

LH: kun EMC: kun GO: kumu KN: kun 

NOM: quân SV: quân SK: kwun 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. There are examples of this graph in 
names in documents preserved in the Shōsōin, such as 難万君 Namakuni or 難 
麻君 Namakuni. This usage also appears in Man’yōshū, where there are 23 
examples, and it is possible to divide these examples into three groups: (i) those 
where 君 represents a nominalized form -kuni (10 examples), (ii) 君 represents 
ku, but this is followed by a nasal-initial syllable, m- or n-, (10 examples), and 
(iii) where 君 simply represents ku (three examples). Thus it can be said with 
some confidence that 君 was originally selected to represent kuni, then later ku 
+ nasal. Finally it could represent just ku. Below is an example of a poem from 
each of the three groups. 


(i) 

MYS 2523 

散頬相 saniTURAPU Red with color— 

色者不出 IRO NIPA IDEZU it does not show on my face 

小文 SUKUNAKU mo but at least 

心中 KOKORO NO UTI NI within my heart 

吾念名君 WA GA OMOPANAkuni I am thinking of you. 

(ii) 

MYS 3510 

美蘇良由久 miswora yuku How I wish that 

君母尓毛我母奈 kumo ni mogamo I were a cloud in the sky. 

家布由伎弖 kyepu yukite Today I would go 

伊母尓許等杼比 imo ni kotodopi and talk to my beloved: 

安須可敝里許武 asuka kapyerikomu I intend to return tomorrow. 

 (iii) 

MYS 1600 

妻戀尓 TUMAGWOPWI ni The autumn bushclover 

鹿鳴山邊之 KA NAKU YAMApye NO by the mountain where 

秋芽子者 AKIPAGWI PA deer call out to their mates— 

露霜寒 TUYU SIMWO SAMUMI the dew and frost being cold 

盛須疑由君 SAKARI sugwi yuku the zenith passes away. 

 

訓 


OJ: kuni, ku OC: *huns 

LH: hunh EMC: xun GO: kumu KN: kun 

NOM: huấn SV: huấn SK: kwun 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage appears in documents in 
possession of Shōsōin, with names like 乙訓 Otokuni and 弟訓部市麻呂 
OTOkuniBYE ITImaro. There is an example in Nihon shoki related to the name 
of a Silla envoy: 金高訓. The NKBT text glosses the name as komu kau kun, 
which would suggest that the older reading was komu kafu kunu, but it could just 
as well have been kuni. 

Shoku Nihongi contains a number of examples of this usage. There is one 
single example of kuni: 乙訓郡 Otokuni District (702.7.8). A number of 
examples of ku include: 訓儒麻呂 Kuzumaro < *kunsumaro (762.8.11) and 
訓志必登 Kusipito (768.8.20). It is possible that the second example is kuzi, 
which if true, would show that the final nasal of 訓 was used to represent 
prenasalization: kunsi > kuzi. 

 

忽 


OJ: kuta OC: *hmə̂ t 

LH: huət EMC: xwət GO: koti KN: kotu 

NOM: hôt SV: hốt SK: hwol 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This graph appears in Samkwuk saki, in 
both the Paekche and Koguryŏ sections dealing with the change in place names. 
It is clear that 忽 is a phonogram to transcribe 城 ‘walled city.’ It is thus 
tempting to say that the word in Paekche is *huət. But as I have noted earlier 


(2000:433–434), evidence from Koguryŏ related to the alternation of 忽 with 
曲 suggests that neither Paekche nor Koguryŏ had *h-; these two languages 
represented this laryngeal with k-. Beckwith (2004:170) provides evidence that 
another phonogram was also used to represent this word: 骨. I line up the 
Chinese and Sino-Xenic data below: 

 

Phonogram LH EMC SV Nom SK 

忽 huət xwət hốt hốt hwol 

曲 khɨok khuawk khúc khúc kwok 

骨 kuət kwət cốt cốt kwol 

 

These data imply that there was h ~ k alternation, suggesting that the 
underlying consonant here was *k. As there is no other overt information, I 
simply suggest that the reading kuta is a carry over from Sino-Paekche. The 
earliest known example of this in Japan appears in Izumo fudoki: 忽美 Kutami. 

From wooden documents dug up from the Nara capital we find a toponym 
忽嶋 Kuta SIMA ‘Kuta Island’ (unnumbered tablet). A related usage also 
appears on a wooden fragment from Nara: 笏賀郷 Kutaga Village (another 
possible reading is Kutuga, MK 2748). 

 

骨 


OJ: kutu OC: *kût 

LH: kuət EMC: kwət GO: koti KN: kotu 

NOM: cốt SV: cốt SK: kwol 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS (see the discussion under 忽 above). 
The name 骨奈嶋 Kutuna SIMA ‘Kutuna Island’ is preserved in Shōsōin 
documents. Ōno (1962:462) notes that the name of this island later became 忽奈 
嶋 Kut?na Island (likely Kutuna). 

 

鬼 


OJ: kwi OC: *kuiʔ 

LH: kuiʔ EMC: kjweiʔ GO: kuwi KN: kuwi 

NOM: quỷ SV: quỷ SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. Several examples appear in Wei zhi, in 
toponyms 鬼 *kui and 鬼奴 *kui-nɔ. Two important examples also appear on 
the Inariyama Tumulus sword, writing the name 多沙鬼獲居 *tɑsɑkui wɑkɑ 
(which many scholars interpret as Tasakwi Wake; see 居 OJ: ke for more 
details), and the place name 斯鬼 *sekui. Miller and Murayama (1979:429, 
433) believe 鬼 in the toponym *sekui (their *sikï) to be transcribing kwi (likely 
城 kwi ‘fortress’). Because this Paekche word for walled city appears to have 
been homophonous with the Old Japanese word ‘tree,’ it is difficult to tell which 
etymology is correct. 

There are a few examples of 鬼 in the Paekche orthographic pool. One 
appears in the record of Kinmei, 鬼室 Kwi-situ. Another example appears in the 
record of Suiko, transcribing the toponym 弗知鬼 Put-te-kwi (Ienaga et al. 
1986.2:176). This same fortress is recorded in the record of Keitai as 費智 *putte, 
strongly suggesting that the attending -kwi in the first example is the suffix 


noun ‘fortress.’ It is also represented as 發鬼 Poti-kwi in the fourth year of 
Bidatsu. 

This graph also appears on wooden tablets (mokkan). One from the Fujiwara 
Palace ruins (fl. 694–710) contains the fragment: 河鬼加布 kakwi kapu ‘buy 
persimmons’ (MK 1250). 

 

貴 


OJ: kwi OC: *kus 

LH: kuis EMC: kuj GO: kuwi KN: kuwi 

NOM: quí SV: quý, quí SK: kwuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs in the PBS. According to Ōno, the oldest example 
of this phonogram comes from 685, found on the inscription of the 僧宝林敬造 
金剛場陀羅尼 Sohōrin keizō kongōjo darani (1962:151), transcribing 志貴評 
sikwi KOPORI ‘Sikwi District.’ Consider, however, that this graph also appears on 
the Silla Namsan stele: 貴干久利城 *kui(s)-kɑn-ku-li Fortress. 

This graph also appears in writings of Paekche names. In the 49th year of 
Jingū the name 王子貴須 Crown Prince Kwisu appears. In the second year of 
Kinmei his name is transcribed as 貴首王 Prince Kwisiu. In the seventh year of 
Yūryaku the name of an immigrant from the peninsula appears: 新漢陶部高 
貴 ・ 鞍 部 堅 貴 SUWETUKURI Kaukwi and KURATUKURI Kenkwi, new 
immigrants from AYA. In the 11th year of Yūryaku is a story of a man who fled 
Paekche and immigrated to Japan. His name is 貴信 Kwisin. He claimed he was 
from Kure. In the seventh year of Keitai is found mention of a Paekche general 
named 姐彌文貴 Sami Monkwi. 

This phonogram also appears in Teisetsu, in the section outlining the 
genealogy of Shōtoku Taishi, where the record has 斯貴嶋宮 “the Sikwi SIMA 
Palace [of Kinmei].” This is an important example, because Shoki records the 
palace name as 磯城嶋金刺宮, where the name is somewhat variant. Likely 
Shoki added sub-names to this name because there were so many similar place 
names. Even Kojiki only has 師木嶋大宮 “the great palace at Sikwi SIMA” 
(KG). This phonogram appears several times on mokkan: 旦波国多貴評 Tanipa 
Province Takwi District (MKK 13:155), 佐々貴山君 Sasakwi YAMA [NO] KIMI 
(unnumbered tablet). 

The phonogram 貴 appears in Kojiki four times, three in annotational notes, 
and once in the poetry. That poem is KK 6, but it is simply the name Adisikwi 
Takahikone, and all four examples of 貴 are exclusively reserved for the 
rendering of the name of this deity 阿治志貴多迦比古泥能迦微 Adisikwi 
Takapikwone no Kamwi (KG). The graph also appears in Hitachi fudoki to 
transcribe the name of the legendary king known as Sujin: 美麻貴天皇 Great 
King Mimakwi. 

The earliest datable example of this phonogram in Japan is a name in the 
Chikuzen Census of 702: 都貴麻呂 Tukwi Maro. This graph also appears in 
Man’yōshū, but it is used only once, and then in the name 志貴嶋 Sikwi SIMA 
(MYS 3254). 

 


歸 


OJ: kwi OC: *kwəi 

LH: kui EMC: kuj GO: kuwe KN: kuwi 

NOM: qui SV: quy, qui SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to EJS. The oldest extant example of this 
phonogram comes from the Suiko corpus, where the toponym 斯歸斯麻 
Sikwisima, the palace of Kinmei, and also a later epithet for Japan, is found. The 
only example of this phonogram found in Teisetsu is the same name: 志歸嶋天 
皇, Great King Sikwi SIMA. 

This phonogram also appears in Hitachi fudoki in a poem: 

許智多雞波 kotitakyeba As the rumors are painful 

乎婆頭勢夜麻能 wobatuse yama no Let us hide ourselves 

伊波歸爾母 ipakwi nimo in the stone enclosure 

爲弖許母郎奈牟 wite komoranamu on Mount Obatsuse. 

奈古非敍和支母 na kwopwi so wagimo Do not yearn for me, my love. 

 

紀 


OJ: kwi OC: *kəʔ 

LH: kɨəʔ EMC: kɨ GO: ko KN: ki 

NOM: kỹ SV: kỷ, kỉ SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The earliest datable example of this 
graph appears in the Mino Census of 702 in the name 紀朝臣宮麻呂 Kwi 
ASOMI MIYAmaro. It also appears in early Nara era documents in the place name 
as 紀 or 紀伊. There is some debate about whether the digraph example is still 
just kwi or perhaps it represents compensatory lengthening of monosyllables, 
which rule still exists in the languages of the Ryūkyūs. 

This phonogram appears in Kojiki as the primary graph: 多紀理毘賣 
Takwiribimye (KG), 紀國 Kwi Province (KG), and 多紀臣 Takwi OMI (KG). 

KK 22 

古波夜 kwo paya Alas, my son, 

美麻紀伊理毘古波夜 mimakwi iribikwo paya Woe is Mimaki Iribiko! 

美麻紀伊理毘古波夜 mimakwi iribikwo paya You, Mimaki Iribiko! 

意能賀袁袁 ono ga wo wo You do not realize that someone 

奴須美斯勢牟登 nusumi sisemu to is waiting to take your life; 

斯理都斗用 siritutwo ywo from the rear gate, but if 

伊由岐多賀比 iyuki tagapi someone appears, they slip 

麻幣都斗用 mapyetutwo ywo around and come from 

伊由岐多賀比 iyuki tagapi the front gate, but if someone 

宇迦迦波久 ukakapaku appears, then they slip around 

斯良爾登 sirani to from the back, waiting for 

美麻紀伊理毘古波夜 mimakwi iribikwo paya a chance, Mimaki Iribiko! 

This phonogram also appears in three annotational notes and 14 times in 
poetry in Nihon shoki: 柀此云磨紀 “ ‘A tree of the Japanese beech variety’ is 
read makwi”(NSG). 

NSK 18 

瀰磨紀 mimakwi Woe is Mimaki 

異利寐胡播揶 iripikwo paya Irihiko! 


飫廼餓烏塢 ono ga wo wo Occupying himself 

志齊務苔 sisemu to with a princess, 

農殊末句志羅珥 nusumaku sirani unaware that someone 

比賣那素寐殊望 pimye naswobisu mo is waiting to take his life. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū 17 times. 

MYS 323 

百式紀乃 MOMOsikwi no I do not recall the year when 

大宮人之 OPOMIYAPITO NO the courtiers of the great palace, 

飽田津尓 NIGITATU ni a fortress of 100 stones piled up 

船乗将為 PUNANORISIKYEMU boarded their ship 

年之不知久 TOSI NO SIRANAku and left the port of Nigita. 

 

幾 


OJ: kwi OC: *kəiʔ 

LH: kɨiʔ EMC: kɨj GO: ke KN: ki 

NOM: NA SV: cơ, ky, kỷ SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It appears in both Kojiki and Nihon 
shoki. This phonogram also appears in Kojiki twice, both in place names: 河内 
国之志幾 ‘Sikwi in the province of KAPUTI’ (NSG) and 志幾之大県 ‘Great 
District of Sikwi’ (NSG). This graph appears only once in Shoki, in the poetry: 

NSK 7 

宇破奈利餓 upanari ga If your favorite wife 

那居波佐麼 na kopasaba asks for a side dish, 

伊智佐介幾 iti sakakwi cut her many slices of meat 

未廼於朋鷄句塢 mwi no opokyeku wo like the hisakaki fruit— 

居氣儾被惠禰 kokwidapwiwene blessed in abundance. 

 

奇 


OJ: kwi OC: *kai or *ɡai 

LH: kɨai or ɡɨai EMC: kiə or ɡiə GO: gi KN: ki 

NOM: cả, kỳ SV: cơ, kỳ SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram appears but once in 
Nihon shoki, in an interesting geographical note found in the record of Jinmu: the 
place name Omonoki 母木 was supposedly corrupted to 飫悶廼奇, Omonokwi. 
As can be seen, there appears to be no corruption, unless the corruption is in the 
meaning: an original ‘fortress of mother’ has changed to ‘mother tree.’ 

In the orthography of Man’yōshū, 奇 is the most popular graph used for kwi, 
appearing 75 times in the anthology. 

MYS 1425 

足比奇乃 ASIpikwi no If the wild cherry blossoms 

山櫻花 YAMA SAKURABANA in the mountains 

日並而 PI NARABETE that cramps the legs 

如是開有者 KAKU SAKITARABA bloom like this day by day 

甚戀目夜裳 PADA KWOPWIME YAMO would there be such intense 

 anguish for longing? 

For an earlier usage, see the same graph under OJ ka. 

 


記 


OJ: kwi OC: *kəh 

LH: kɨəh EMC: kɨ GO: ko KN: ki 

NOM: ký, ghi SV: ký SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This is a phonogram belongs to the LJS. Jidai betsu kokugo daijiten 
(1967:892) claims this graph appears only in Man’yōshū, but I have not been able 
to locate any examples. It is possible that an original graph 紀 was mistakenly 
copied as 記 in one instance, but I cannot find a single example of 記 used as a 
phonogram. There is an example of it on a wooden document (mokkan): 肥後国 
天草郡志記郷 PIGO Province AMAKUSA District Sikwi Village (MKK 13:142). 

 

寄 


OJ: kwi OC: *kaih 

LH: kɨaih EMC: kiə GO: ki KN: ki 

NOM: NA SV: kí, ký SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This is a phonogram belongs to the LJS. This graph appears once in 
Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3687 

安思必寄能 asipikwi no Oh, wild duck 

山等妣古由留 YAMA tobi kwoyuru who flies over the mountain 

可里我祢波 kari gane pa that cramps the legs 

美也故尓由加波 miyakwo ni yukaba if you fly to the capital 

伊毛尓安比弖許祢 imwo ni apite kone please go see my beloved. 

 

綺 


OJ: kwi OC: *khaiʔ 

LH: khʔaiʔ EMC: khiə GO: ki KN: ki 

NOM: NA SV: khỉ, ỹ SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This is a phonogram belongs to the LJS. This graph appears twice in 
Man’yōshū. 

MYS 4040 

布勢能宇良乎 puse no ura wo If I am able to go 

由吉底之見弖婆 yukitesi MIteba to Fuse Bay 

毛母之綺能 momosikwi no then I will tell 

於保美夜比等尓 opomiyabito ni the courtiers of the great palace 

可多利都藝底牟 katari tugitemu a fortress built of 100 stones. 

 

騎 


OJ: kwi OC: *ɡaih 

LH: ɡɨɑih EMC: ɡiə LMC: kɦi GO: gi KN: ki 

NOM: kỵ SV: kì, kỳ, kỵ SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This is a phonogram belongs to the CBS. This graph appears only in 
Man’yōshū, twice, in Book 1, both times transcribing the place name akwi no 
(OPO)NWO ‘(great) plain of Aki’: 阿騎乃大野 (MYS 45) and 阿騎乃野 (MYS 
46). 

 


機 


OJ: kwi OC: *kəi 

LH: kɨi EMC: kɨj LMC: ki GO: ke KN: ki 

NOM: cơ SV: cơ SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It is used only once in the poetry of 
Nihon shoki. 

NSK 7 

于儾能 uda no In the high 

多伽機珥 takakwi ni fort of Uda 

辭藝和奈破蘆 sigi wana paru a trap for snipe I set, 

和餓末菟夜 wa ga matu ya and as I waited— 

辭藝破佐夜羅孺 sigi pa sayarazu it did not catch a snipe. 

 

基 


OJ: kwi OC: *kə 

LH: kɨə EMC: kɨ LMC: ki GO: ko KN: ki 

NOM: cơ SV: cơ SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the CBS. It appears four times in the poetry of Nihon 
shoki: 

NSK 100 

柯羅倶爾能 kara kuni no Standing upon the walls 

基能陪儞陁致底 kwi no pe ni tatite of the Kara fortress 

於譜磨故幡 opobakwo pa Ōbako is waving 

比例甫囉須母 pire purasu mo her white scarf— 

耶魔等陸武岐底 yamatopye mukite waving it toward Yamato. 

 

己 


OJ: kwi OC: *kəʔ 

LH: kɨə EMC: kɨ LMC: ki GO: ko KN: ki 

NOM: kỷ SV: kỷ, kỉ SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and is found only once in the poetry of 
Nihon shoki: 

NSK 83 

伊儺武斯盧 inamusiro The willow growing along 

呵簸泝比野儺擬 kapaswopi yanagwi the banks of the river bends 

寐逗愈凱麼 midu yukeba with the flow of the water. 

儺弭企於己陀智 nabiki okwitati Fluttering or standing tall 

曾能泥播宇世儒 sono ne pa usezu the roots remain unchanged. 

 

既 


OJ: kwi OC: *kəts 

LH: kɨs > kɨj EMC: kɨj LMC: ki GO: ke KN: ki 

NOM: NA SV: ký, kí SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram, used to transcribe kwi, belongs to the CBS, but the history 
of this graph is quite long and somewhat complex. This phonogram originally 
appeared in the PBS, and appears in a number of Paekche names, representing ko 
(which see). In the LJS it represents ke, and then in the CBS kwi. 


To the information provided above, also consider the following additional 
information gleaned from Chữ Nôm: 穊 cấy, 摡 khơi, coupled with the 
evidence from Sino-Korean, and these suggests that the underlying phonology 
was *kəi. It would appear that at an earlier period the final vowel was ignored, 
resulting in [kə] for ko. 

The graph 既 used for kwi only appears once in Nihon shoki, in the 
annotational notes in the record of Tenmu: 齊忌此云踰既 “ ‘The first fruits’ are 
called yukwi” (NSG). See the same phonogram 既 under OJ ke and ko. 

 

氣 


OJ: kwi OC: *khə(t)s 

LH: kɨs > kɨj EMC: khɨj LMC: khi GO: ke KN: ki 

NOM: khí SV: khí SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This phonogram only appears twice in 
the poetry of Shoki. 

NSK 7 

于儾能 uda no In the high 

多伽機珥 takakwi ni fort of Uda 

辭藝和奈破蘆 sigi wana paru a trap for snipe I set, 

和餓末菟夜 wa ga matu ya and as I waited— 

辭藝破佐夜羅孺 sigi pa sayarazu it did not catch a snipe. 

伊殊區波辭 isukupasi What it did capture 

區旎羅佐夜離 kudira sayari were two intrepid hawks. 

固奈瀰餓 kwonami ga If your first wife 

那居波佐麼 na kopasaba asks for a side dish, 

多智曾麼能 tatisoba no cut her many slices of meat 

未廼那鷄句塢 mwi no nakyeku wo with almost no flesh— 

居氣辭被惠禰 kokwisipwiwene barren, like the hawthorn. 

宇破奈利餓 upanari ga If your favorite wife 

那居波佐麼 na kopasaba asks for a side dish, 

伊智佐介幾 iti sakakwi cut her many slices of meat 

未廼於朋鷄句塢 mwi no opokyeku wo like the hisakaki fruit— 

居氣儾被惠禰 kokwidapwiwene blessed in abundance. 

See the same graph under OJ ke. 

 

木 


OJ: kwi OC: *môk 

LH: mok EMC: məwk GO: moku KN: moku 

NOM: mộc, mọc, mốc SV: mộc SK: mwok 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the read OJ kwi ‘tree.’ The oldest known example 
of this phonogram comes from the Suiko corpus, found in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō 
teisetsu, writing the ancient place name KATURAKWI 葛木. A datable example 
of this toponym comes from 702, when the census was taken in Mino. The place 
name of KATURAKWI also appears on the Wina Mabito Omura tombstone from 
707. 

The kungana 木 is also used in Kojiki, which preserves the older 
orthographical stratum inherited from the Suiko era. This graph appear 69 times 


in annotational notes. Two examples suffice: 高木神 TAKAKWI [NO] KAMWI 
‘high tree deity’ (KG), and 船木 PUNAKWI ‘ship-tree’ (KG), though the 
semantics are based on the characters, and there is no guarantee that these are the 
original meanings. 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, used only for proper names: 武 
諸木 TAKE MOROKWI (NSG), and 木梨輕皇子 Prince KWINASI KARU 
(NSG). While there are 180 examples of 城, there are only nine examples of 木. 
This usage is also very productive in Man’yōshū. Many of these examples 
transcribe the epithet for ‘mountain’ asipikwi: 足比木・足日木・足氷木, 
provisionally translated as ‘which cramps the legs.’ 

MYS 1110 

湯種蒔 YUDANE MAKE Searching for new land 

荒木之小田矣 ARAKWI NO WODA WO to open and plant 

求跡 MOTOMEMU TO sacred rice seeds 

足結出所沾 AYUPI PA NURENU my leggings are wet— 

此水之湍尓 KONO KAPA NO SE ni at the shoal of this river. 

See the same graph under ko. 

 

城 


OJ: kwi OC: *ɡeŋ 

LH: dźeŋ < ɡieŋ EMC: dʑiajŋ GO: ziyau KN: sei 

NOM: thành SV: thành SK: syeng 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind the OJ word kwi ‘walled city, fortress.’ Miller 
(1976:400, 408) argues that the Japanese word kwi ‘walled city’ comes from the 
Old Korean word kuj. He slightly modifies his spelling in a later paper to kŭy 
(1979:16). On the other hand, Martin (1987:449) cautions, “But the Japanese 
etymon may be a noun *ka[k]u-Ci made from the root of the verb stem kakum[
a]- ‘enclose, surround.’ ” 

While Martin’s point is valid, the essential question remains: how did the 
ancients take the graph for ‘walled city’ and attach a reading of kwi to it? This is 
clearly a case, similar to the example with 木, where the ancients are taking a 
native word, almost always a noun, and mapping a certain graph on to it, because 
of a perfect two-way match. If the Paekche scribes already had a word for this 
kanji, it may be the case that the Paekche scribes attached the kanji to the loan 
kwi which had already entered the Japanese language. My own research (Bentley 
2000) shows that the word for walled city in Paekche was transcribed with 己 
(LH kɨə, EMC kɨ), so the phonological match is good. 

The earliest example of this usage appears the place name KATURAKWI 葛 
城 found in a Shōtoku Taishi genealogy. This usage appears in Kojiki in names 
like 石城國 IPAKWI Province (KG) and 葛城 KATURAKWI (KG). 

As noted before, 城 appears 180 times in Shoki, mostly used in proper 
names or toponyms that end with kwi. A few examples other than 葛城 
KATURAKWI are 泊 瀬 列 城 PATUSE [NO] NAMIKWI (NSG), 筒 城 
TUTUKWI (NSG), 水間城之王 the king MIMAKWI (NSG), and 磯城嶋 
SIKWI SIMA (NSG). 


This usage was also quite popular in Man’yōshū, though many of the 
examples are in the epithet MOMOSIKWI NO 百磯城之・百石城之, translated as 
‘a fortress built with 100 stones.’ 

 

黄 


OJ: kwi OC: *wâŋ 

LH: ɣuaŋ EMC: ɣwaŋ GO: wau 

NOM: hoàng SV: hoàng, huỳnh SK: hwang 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ kwi ‘yellow.’ The oldest datable use of this 
phonogram comes from 753, on the Yakushiji Buddhist Footprints stone 
inscription: 黄文本実, writing KWIPUMI PONZITI, pointing to Kifumi Honjichi 
seen in the 10th year of Tenji. There are as yet no datable examples of this 
phonogram from an era early than Nara. 

The only example that likely dates from the Asuka era appears in Nihon 
shoki. There are six examples of 黄 in proper names in Shoki. An illustrative 
example is 黄書造本実, glossed as KWIPUMI [NO] MIYATUKWO PONZITI (NSG). 
This surname is written as 黄文 in 12th year of Tenmu. Shinsen shōjiroku 
records that this family came from Koguryŏ. 

 

樹 


OJ: kwi OC: *doʔ 

LH: dźoʔ EMC: dʑuə GO: ziu KN: siu 

NOM: NA SV: thụ SK: syu 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ kwi ‘tree.’ This graph appears mainly 
in proper names in Shoki and Man’yōshū. In place names or personal names 
where the element kwi appeared, if the writer believed the etymology to have 
something to do with ‘trees,’ this phonogram was often selected. An example in 
Shoki appears in the record of Keitai: 河 内 母樹馬 飼 首 OMONOKWI 
UMAKAPI [NO] OBITO of KAPUTI (NSG). 

This kungana appears only once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 55 

朝毛吉 ASA mo YOSI How envious the man from Ki 

木人乏母 KWI PITO TOMOSI mo where mornings are delightful. 

亦打山 MATUTI YAMA Is he gazing at Mount Matsuchi 

行来跡見良武 YUKIKU TO MIramu as he travels on his way? Yes! 

樹人友師母 KWI PITO TOMOsi mo How envious the man from Ki. 

 

古 


OJ: kwo OC: *kâʔ 

LH: kɑʔ > kɔ EMC: kɔ GO: ko KN: ko 

NOM: cổ SV: cổ SK: kwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. This graph appears in Wei zhi, in the 
following title 狗古智卑狗 *kɔ-kɔ-te-pe-kɔ and the toponym 好古都 *hɔ-kɔtɔ. 
On the peninsula this phonogram does not appear in the Paekche inscriptions, 
but it does in the Koguryŏ corpus. Consider the following place names recorded 
on the Kwangkaytho stele: 古舎蔦城 *ko-tsa-tio fortress, 古利城 *ko-ri 


fortress, 古模 耶 羅 城 *ko-mo-ra-ra fortress, 家古龍 羅 城 *ka-ko-ruŋ-ra 
fortress, 古牟婁城 *ko-mu-ro fortress, and 炅古城 *kiəŋ-ko fortress. 

This phonogram is also found in Paekche quotes in Nihon shoki. Two 
examples appear in the record of Jingū: 莫古 Makkwo and 過古 Kakwo, both 
personal names. The record of Jingū also preserves place names from the Karak 
Federation and neighboring areas which use this graph: 古奚津 landing of 
Kwokye, 半古邑 Pankwo Village, and 古沙山 Mount Kwosa. 

This phonogram appears in several liturgies: 奉宇豆乃幣帛者。比古神爾 
御服明妙照妙和妙荒妙五色物 TATEMATURU udu no MITEGURA PA pikwoGAMWI 
ni MISO [PA] AKARUTAPE TERUTAPE NIKITAPE ITUIRO [NO] MONO “As for the 
exalted offerings that are presented, these will become fabric for the PIKO 
deities, fabric that is brilliant, glowing, soft, coarse, consisting of the five 
colors…” (NT 4). This phonogram appears many times in inscriptions found on 
mokkan: 伊刀古麻呂 Itwokwo Maro (MK 1926), 阿古女 AkwoMYE (MKK 
4:13), 古奈都女 KwonatuMYE (MK 415). 

This phonogram is the main graph to transcribe kwo in Kojiki, used a total of 
136 times (Ōno 1977:171–175). Examples from names include 神倭伊波禮毘古 
KAMU YAMATO Ipare Bikwo (KG), 宇摩志阿斯訶備比古遲 Umasi Asikabwi 
Pikwodi (KG), and one phrase 阿那迩夜志愛袁登古袁 anani yasi e wotokwo 
wo “How wonderful, a good man” (KG). 

KK 11 

美都美都斯 mitumitusi You, the intrepid 

久米能古良賀 kume no kwora ga sons of the Kume— 

阿波布爾波 apa pu ni pa In the millet field 

賀美良比登母登 kamira pito moto there is one fetid leek. 

曾泥賀母登 so ne ga moto At the base of that root, 

曾泥米都那藝弖 so ne me tunagite with both root and sprout, 

宇知弖志夜麻牟 utitesi yamamu we will utterly smite them. 

There are three examples of this phonogram in the annotational notes of 
Shoki, and 37 in the poetry: 衫子此云莒呂母能古, “ ‘robe child’ is read koromo 
no kwo” (NSG). 

NSK 61 

破始多氐能 pasi tate no Like a standing ladder, 

佐餓始枳揶摩茂 sagasiki yama mo if my love and I can climb 

和藝毛古等 wagimwokwo to these mountains together 

赴駄利古喩例麼 putari kwoyureba then things will be tranquil, 

揶須武志呂箇茂 yasumusiro kamo like resting on a straw mat. 

This phonogram is used more than any other of the many graphs used to 
represent kwo in Man’yōshū, appearing 214 times (compared with 故 143 times, 
胡 27 times, 祜 five times, and 姑 once). 

MYS 3602 

安乎尓余志 awo ni yosi How I never tire 

奈良能美夜古尓 nara no miyakwo ni of gazing at the heavenly 

多奈妣家流 tanabikyeru clouds that spread out 

安麻能之良久毛 ama no sirakumo over the capital of Nara 

見礼杼安可奴加毛 MIredo akanu kamo where the green earth is good. 

There is excellent evidence that the distinction of kwo versus ko survived 


until the end of the ninth century or early into the 10th century. That evidence is 
preserved in a Chinese dictionary produced in Japan, called Shinsen jikyō (ca. 
899). Consider the evidence listed in the following chart: 

 

OJ word 

Kojiki 

Nihon shoki 

Shinsen jikyō 

kasikwom- ‘be in awe’ 

加斯古美 

訶志胡瀰 

加志古万留 

kwo ‘child’ 

古 

古 

古 

kwonami ‘first wife’ 

古那美 

固奈瀰 

古奈美 

kwoy- ‘cross over’ 

NA 

古喩例麼 

古由 

mwokwo ‘the other one’ 

毛古 

毛胡 

毛古 

kokoro ‘heart, mind’ 

許許呂 

虚々呂 

己己呂 

kome ‘rice’ 

NA 

渠梅 

己女 

koto ‘words’ 

許登 

渠騰 

己止 

poko ‘halberd’ 

富許 

NA 

保己 

toko ‘eternal’ 

登許 

騰擧 

止己 



 

As this chart makes clear, Shinsen jikyō has preserved the distinction 
between kwo and ko with perfect accuracy. 

 

觚 


OJ: kwo OC: *kwâ 

LH: kua > kuɔ EMC: kɔ GO: ko KN: ko 

NOM: NA SV: cô SK: kwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in several titles: 泄謨觚 
*satu-mɔ-kɔ, 柄渠觚 *pa-gɔ-kɔ, and 兕馬觚 *si-ma-kɔ. It is unclear why this 
graph, which means ‘ritual wine vessel’ was abandoned by the Japanese. Nihon 
shoki uses a related graph, 孤 ‘orphan’ once: 少男、此云烏等孤 “ ‘Young 
boy,’ this is read wotokwo” (NSG). It should be noted that while there is no Nom 
reading for 觚, the Nom reading for 孤 is cô, the same SV reading as 觚. 

 

高 


OJ: kwo OC: *kaw 

LH: kau EMC: kaw GO: kau KN: kau 

NOM: cao SV: cao SK: kwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. There are a few examples in 
inscriptions on the Korean peninsula, but none appear in Paekche inscriptions. 
The obvious example from the peninsula is the usage of the name of the powerful 
kingdom, Koguryŏ, 高句麗, kwo-ku-rəi. This name appears as early as the Wei 
zhi. The graph 高 was also used by Silla, as seen in the Silla Musuo (新羅戊戌 
塢, ca. 578) inscription: 高□塢 kwo X wo, which appears to be a personal 
name. 

This phonogram was well suited to transcribe OJ kwo, but in the Old 
Japanese corpus it is used mainly to write personal names and toponyms. This 
graph does not appear in the Suiko era corpus, but does appear in the Paekche 
orthographic pool preserved in Nihon shoki. One is a name of a Paekche official, 
施徳高分 “Kwobun of the eighth rank.” This same official appears one year 


later, in the fifth year of Kinmei, his name now written 施 徳 高 分 屋 
“Kwobunwoku of the eighth rank.” 

Other usages found in the OJ corpora are: 大阿斯高 OPO Asikwo, personal 
name (Sairinji Temple Buddhist inscription, ca. 659), and 支彌高 Kimikwo, 
personal name (Sairinji inscription). 

In Kojiki this phonogram is used 15 times, in names and toponyms like 高志 
國 Kwosi Province (KG), 高目郎女 Kwomuku IRATUMYE (KG), and 丸高王 
Prince MARUkwo (KG). 

 

固 


OJ: kwo OC: *kâh 

LH: kɑh > kɔ EMC: kɔ GO: ko KN: ko 

NOM: có SV: cố, cổ SK: kwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It is used to transcribe the name 固徳 
馬次文 Kwotok Masimon in quotes of Paekche material in Nihon shoki. Here 
kwotok represents the ninth rank of the Paekche government system. 

This phonogram appears in Nihon shoki, six times in the poetry. 

NSK 19 

飫朋佐介珥 oposaka ni If people were to 

菟藝廼煩例屢 tuginoboreru pass down hand to hand 

伊辭務邏塢 isimura wo all the boulders that 

多誤辭珥固佐縻 tagwosi ni kwosaba make up Mount Ōsaka 

固辭介氐務介茂 kwosikatemu kamo perhaps it could be moved. 

 

故 


OJ: kwo OC: *kâh 

LH: kɑh > kɔ EMC: kɔ GO: ko KN: ko 

NOM: cố SV: cố SK: kwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The phonogram 故 appears once in 
Kojiki, in a poem (KK 2), representing a toponym: 故志能久邇 kwosi no kuni 
‘the land of Kwosi.’ 

This graph appears once in the annotational notes and six times in the poetry 
of Nihon shoki: 珍彦此云于砮毘故, “ ‘Rare prince’ is read udupikwo” (NSG). 

NSK 65 

和餓勢故餓 wa ga sekwo ga Surely this is the evening 

勾倍枳豫臂奈利 ku beki yopi nari when my beloved will come. 

佐瑳餓泥能 sasagane no Tonight’s token 

區茂能於虚奈比 kumo no okonapi is the spider’s handiwork. 

虚豫比辭流辭毛 ko yopi sirusi mo being spun in the bamboo grass. 

This phonogram appears quite frequently in Man’yōshū, used 143 times, 
mainly in Books 15 and 20. 

MYS 3585 

和伎母故我 wagimokwo ga Will I undo the cord 

之多尓毛伎余等 sita nimo kiyo to of the robe that you, 

於久理多流 okuritaru my beloved, gave to me, 

許呂母能比毛乎 koromo no pimo wo saying, ‘Wear it 

安礼等可米也母 are tokame ya mo under your clothes’? 


庫 


OJ: kwo OC: *khâh 

LH: khɑh EMC: khɔ GO: ko KN: ko 

NOM: khố, kho SV: khố SK: kwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage appears in a Nara era 
document as 武庫郡 to transcribe Mukwo District. This same usage also 
appears in Nihon shoki. Interestingly, notice that while the Ōjin account in Shoki 
writes Mukwo as 武庫, the Jingū account represents it as 務古. Man’yōshū also 
uses this phonogram three times, but all represent Mukwo. 

 

祜 


OJ: kwo OC: *ɡâʔ 

LH: ɡɑʔ > ɡɔʔ EMC: ɣɔ GO: go KN: ko 

NOM: NA SV: hộ SK: hwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only in Man’yōshū. 
Depending on which manuscripts one examines, there are roughly five examples 
of this graph. Clearly this phonogram was easily confused with 枯. 

MYS 105 

吾勢祜乎 WA GA sekwo wo When I sent you, 

倭邊遺登 YAMATOpye YARU to my brother, off toward 

佐夜深而 saYWO PUKETE Yamato in the dead of night 

鷄鳴露尓 AKATOKI TUYU ni I stood there 

吾立所霑之 WA GA TATENUREsi drenched in the dew of dawn. 

 

枯 


OJ: kwo OC: *khâ 

LH: khɑ > kɔ EMC: khɔ GO: ko KN: ko 

NOM: khô, gỗ SV: khô SK: kwo, kwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram only appears in 
Man’yōshū, and the various manuscripts seem to agree that there is at least one 
definite example. As noted above, this is easily confused with 祜. 

MYS 43 

吾勢枯波 WA GA sekwo pa I wonder where my brother 

何所行良武 IDUKU YUKUramu is journeying now. 

己津物 OKITU MO NO Will he cross Mount Nabari, 

隠乃山乎 NABARI no YAMA wo seaweed in the offing, 

今日香越等六 KEPU KA KWOYURAMU some time today? 

 

姑 


OJ: kwo OC: *kâ 

LH: kɑ > kɔ EMC: kɔ LMC: kuə GO: ko KN: ko 

NOM: cô SV: cô SK: kwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears twice in the annotational 
notes and five times in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 肉入籠此云之之梨姑 “ ‘(the 
toponym) Sisiriko’ is read sisirikwo” (NSG). 


NSK 123 

枳瀰我梅能 kimi ga me no I dock and stand here 

姑裒之枳舸羅儞 kwoposiki kara ni because I long for a glance 

婆底々威底 patete wite of my highness’ eyes. 

舸矩野姑悲武謀 kaku ya kwopwimu mo How I long for a look— 

枳瀰我梅弘報梨 kimi ga me wo pori a look into my highness’ eyes. 

This phonogram appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1602 

山妣姑乃 YAMAbikwo no Near the mountains 

相響左右 APITOYOMU MADE where the stag calls out 

妻戀尓 TUMAGWOPWI ni for its mate that it longs for, 

鹿鳴山邊尓 KA NAKU YAMApye ni such that it echoes, 

獨耳為手 PITORI NOMWI SITE I only want to be alone. 

 

孤 


OJ: kwo OC: *kwâ 

LH: kuɑ > kuɔ EMC: kɔ LMC: kuə GO: ko KN: ko 

NOM: cô, co SV: cô SK: kwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It occurs only once in Nihon shoki, in 
the following annotative note: 少男此云烏等孤 “ ‘Young boy,’ this is read 
wotokwo” (NSG). 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, but the great majority of the 
many examples of this phonogram are used to transcribe OJ kwop- ‘to yearn for, 
long for,’ which usage is influenced by the semantics of the phonogram 孤 ‘be 
alone.’ An excellent example of this visual aspect of Man’yōshū appears below 
in a somewhat difficult poem. 

MYS 67 

旅尓之而 TABI ni siTE While on a journey 

物戀之伎尓 MONO KWOPWIsiki ni if I had not heard 

鶴之鳴毛 TADU GA NE mo the forlorn cry of the crane 

不所聞有世者 KIKOYEZARIseBA then perhaps I would 

孤悲而死萬思 kwopwiTE SINAmasi have died from yearning. 

Here kwopwi ‘yearning’ is represented by 孤悲 ‘lonely-sad,’ and the subjunctive 
masi is represented with 萬思 ‘ten thousand thoughts.’ 

 

顧 


OJ: kwo OC: *kâʔ 

LH: kɑh > kɔ EMC: kɔ LMC: kuə GO: ku KN: ko 

NOM: cố SV: cố SK: kwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and only appears once in the poetry in 
Nihon shoki. 

NSK 2 

阿妹奈屢夜 ame naru ya In the heavens 

乙登多奈婆多廼 woto tanabata no the jewels strung upon 

汙奈餓勢屢 unagaseru the string hung around 

多磨廼彌素磨屢廼 tama no misumaru no the neck of the Weaver Maiden 

阿奈陀磨波夜 anatama pa ya are very beautiful— 


彌多爾 mitani like the beauty of him who 

輔柁和柁羅須 puta watarasu shines over two hills, 

阿泥素企多伽避顧禰 adisukitakapikwone Ajisuki Taka Hikone. 

I have not been able to confirm the Go-on reading of ku, but the reading in 
dictionaries is counterintuitive, given that the Later Han reading is a back, lower 
vowel, while ku is a high back vowel. 

 

胡 


OJ: kwo OC: *ɡâ 

LH: ɡɑ > ɡɔ EMC: ɣɔ LMC: xɦuə GO: go KN: ko 

NOM: hò, hồ SV: hồ SK: hwo 

Usage / History: 

See this under /gwo/. 

 

子 


OJ: kwo OC: *tsəʔ 

LH: tsiəʔ EMC: tsɨ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: tí, tử, gã SV: tí, tử SK: co 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ kwo ‘child.’ There are five examples 
preserved in the Suiko era corpus, showing that this usage caught on rather early. 
Interestingly, all of these examples belong to personal names, suggesting that 
writing personal names became standardized rather quickly, likely because of the 
importance and prestige attached to a person’s name. 

An interesting example of this principal is the name of Swoga Umakwo, the 
premier head of the Swoga family. In two different records of the Gangōji temple, 
Umakwo’s name is written 有明子 u-ma-KWO. Another example, found in the 
Jōgū Taishi Keifu, represents a prince’s name as 麻里子王, Prince MaroKWO 
(or perhaps MariKWO). There is the possibility that this is a logogram, if kwo 
was interpreted as ‘son’ or ‘heir.’ For the time being I leave it here. 

The earliest secure date for this usage appears in the Mino Census of 702, in 
the name 和子賣 WaKWOmye. This kungana appears in Nihon shoki: 凡水手 
曰 鹿子、 蓋 始 起 于 是 時 也 ‘Perhaps people calling ‘oarsmen’ KAKWO 
originated at this time’ (NSG). 

Surprisingly there are few of these kunganas in Man’yōshū, as Ōno only 
counts 11 in the anthology (1977:392). 

MYS 7 

金野乃 AKI NO NWO no I recall that temporary hut 

美草苅葺 miKUSA KARIPUKI where we spent one night 

屋杼礼里之 YAdorerisi in the capital at Uji 

兎道乃宮子能 uDI no MIYAKWO no which was thatched with grass 

借五百礒所念 KARI IPO SI OMOPOYU from the golden fields. 

 

兒 


OJ: kwo OC: *ŋe 

LH: ńe EMC: ɲiə GO: ni KN: zi 

NOM: nhi, SV: nhi SK: o, yey 

Usage / History: 

Like the usage above (with 子), this kungana calls to mind OJ kwo ‘child.’ 
The earliest datable example appears in the Bungo Provincial census of 702: 兒 


嶋賣 KWOSIMAmye. There are 11 examples of this usage in Kojiki: 吉備兒嶋 
Kibwi [NO] KWOSIMA (KG), 天兒屋命 AME [NO] KWOYANE [NO] MIKOTO 
(KG), and 建貝兒王 Prince TAKE KAPIKWO (KG). 

Compared to 232 examples of 子 in Nihon shoki, there are only 14 usages 
of 兒 (Ōno 1977:824): 天兒屋命 AME [NO] KWOYANE [NO] MIKOTO (NSG). 

There are nine examples of this usage in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3442 

安豆麻治乃 adumadi no I cannot pass over 

手兒乃欲妣左賀 TEKWO no ywobi saka the hill that calls out tekwo 

古要我祢弖 kwoyeganete on the road to the east— 

夜麻尓可祢牟毛 yama ni ka nemu mo Will I sleep on the mountain, 

夜杼里波奈之尓 yadoripanasi ni with nowhere to lodge? 

 

小 


OJ: kwo OC: *sewʔ 

LH: siauʔ EMC: siaw GO: seu KN: seu 

NOM: tĩu, tiểu SV: tiểu SK: sywo 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ kwo ‘small’ Like the previous two 
usages above, this one is generally used with personal names and toponyms. 

The earliest datable usage appears in a wooden document (mokkan) 
excavated from the ruins of the Fujiwara Palace (fl. 697–710), where the name 
大伴小山 OPOTOMO KWOYAMA appears (MK 1807). 

In Nihon shoki the majority of usages with 小 transcribe wo ‘small.’ One 
example where 小 transcribes kwo is in the name 小手子 KWOTEKWO. Her 
name is written as 古弖古 kwotekwo in Jōgū shōtoku hōō teisetsu. 

There are a small number of usages of 小 to represent OJ kwo in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 475 

挂巻母 KAKEMAKU mo What trepidation 

綾尓恐之 AYA ni KASIKWOsi to put into words; 

言巻毛 IPAMAKU mo What reverence 

齊忌志伎可物 YUYUsiki kamo to dare even utter; 

吾王 WA GA OPOKIMI Our great ruler, 

御子乃命 MIKWO no MIKOTO the august prince, 

萬代尓 YORODU YO ni who should have 

食賜麻思 MESITAMAPAmasi ruled for ten thousand reigns— 

大日本 OPOYAMATO when spring with soft herbs 

久邇乃京者 kuni no MIYAKWO PA comes to the capital 

打靡 UTINABIKU of Great Yamato, with flowers 

春去奴礼婆 PARU SARInureba in bloom and nodding 

山邊尓波 YAMApye nipa near the base of the mountains, 

花咲乎為里 PANA SAKIwowiri and young trout jump 

河湍尓波 KAPASE nipa in the shoals of the river, 

年魚小狭走 AYUKWO SABASIRI at a time when 

弥日異 IYA PIKE NI he prospered more, 

榮時尓 SAKAYURU TOKI ni day be day, 

逆言之 OYODURE NO should one say thoughtless, 

狂言登加聞 TAPAKOTO to kamo hurtful things? 


籠 


OJ: kwo OC: *rôŋ(ʔ) 

LH: loŋ(h) EMC: ləwŋ(h) GO: ru KN: rou 

NOM: lung, lồng, trông SV: lung SK: rong 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ kwo ‘basket.’ This usage appears in 
the Atago District, Yamashiro Province (733) tax register in the name 塩籠賣 
SIPOKWOmye. 

This usage also appears in Nihon shoki: 河内馬飼首荒籠 KAPUTI UMAKAPI 
OBITO ARAKWO ‘Umakai Obito Arako of Kawachi’ (NSG), 阿閉臣大籠 APE 
OMI OPOKWO (NSG), and 鳥篭山 TOKWO [NO] YAMA ‘Mount Toko’ (NSG). 

There are three examples of this usage in Man’yōshū. Two simply write 
TOKWO [NO] YAMA ‘Mount Toko’ 鳥籠山 (MYS 487, 2710). The final 
example appears below. 

MYS 193 

八多籠良我 pataKWOra ga The path that 

夜晝登不云 YWORU PIRU to IPAZU the conscripted laborers 

行路乎 YUKU MITI wo travel day and night 

吾者皆悉 WARE PA KOTOGOTO is the path we all use 

宮道叙為 MIYADI NI zo SURU to go to the place of mourning. 

 

粉 


OJ: kwo OC: *pənʔ 

LH: punʔ EMC: punʔ GO: fumu KN: fun 

NOM: phấn SV: phấn SK: pun 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ kwo ‘flour.’ This usage appears three 
times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2649 

足日木之 ASIPIKWI NO Like the smoldering mosquito 

山田守翁 YAMADA MORU WODI smudge lit by the old man who 

置蚊火之 OKU KAPWI NO guards the mountain paddies, 

下粉枯耳 SITA KWOGARE NOMWI those hills that tire the legs, 

余戀居久 A GA KWOPWI WORAku my yearning burns inside me. 

 

奚 


OJ: kye OC: *ɡê 

LH: ɡe EMC: ɣɛj GO: gei KN: kei 

NOM: hề SV: hề SK: hoi, hyey 

Usage / History: 

I place this phonogram in the PBS. As most work on man’yōgana goes, 
scholars tend to group this phonogram in Nara era works, like Man’yōshū, 
without noticing that this phonogram appears in Shoki, mainly in Korean proper 
nouns. Analogous to writings with 解, this phonogram (奚) would have been 
available to the ancient Japanese for use in their new orthographic system. For 
example, one of the seven nation-states that supposedly made up the Karak 
Federation is written 古奚津 Kwo-kye NARI. Also in the record of Keitai, the 
following personal names and toponyms appear (Ienaga et al. 1986.2:30–33): a 
personal name 辛已奚 Sin Zɨ-kye from Ara (安羅), a person 既殿奚 Kɨj 


Twɨn-kye from Hanpye (伴跛, written 本彼 in the Korean histories), a toponym 
満奚 Man-kye in Hanpye, and a toponym 麻且奚 Ma Chja-kye in Hanpye. 

The evidence for 奚 used in the Japanese orthography is strengthened by the 
fact that the phonogram at least survived in some parts of Man’yōshū. Ōno 
(1977:384) notes four examples in the anthology. A fairly old example comes 
from a poem dated before 707: 

MYS 277 

速来而母 PAYA KITE mo I should have come 

見手益物乎 MITE MASIMONO wo sooner to view them— 

山背 YAMASIRO NO the autumn leaves of 

高槻村 TAKA NO TUKWI MURA the zelkova grove of Taka 

散去奚留鴨 TIRINIkyeru KAMO in Yamashiro have all scattered. 

This phonogram also appears in Harima fudoki in 意奚袁奚二皇子 ‘The 
two princes Okye and Wokye.’ Also a variant of the first name also appears in 
the same record as 於奚 Okye. 

 

祁 


OJ: kye OC: *ɡri 

LH: ɡɨ EMC: ɡji GO: gi KN: ki 

NOM: kì SV: kỳ, kì SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The phonological information for this 
graph points to OJ gi (Old Northwest Chinese has tśi or dźi which suggests *gi). 
Miyake (2003a:221) suggests, “[T]he fact that 祁 EMC *gyi ‘grand’ was chosen 
to be the sole phonogram for OJ kye in Kojiki tells us that the pronunciation of OJ 
kye must have resembled the pronunciation of OJ kyi (our ki)....” It is possible 
that this graph had a slightly lower nuclear vowel, perhaps influenced by Sino- 
Paekche, when it entered the Japanese orthography. 

This phonogram appears on several mokkan: 都祁仕丁 tukye, perhaps a 
name? (MK 1797), 祁由利足床 Kyeyuri ASITOKO (unnumbered tablet). 

Consider the following from Kojiki: 在祁理 ARIkyeri ‘(how) is it (that)...,’ 
訓建云多祁夫 ‘the reading of 建 ‘roar, act violently’ is takyebu,’ and 汝之宇 
志波祁流葦原中國 IMASI NO usipakyeru ASIPARA [NO] NAKATU KUNI ‘the middle 
land of Ashihara that you possess...” (KG). 

KK 60 

夜麻斯呂迩 yamasiro ni Mount Bird in Yamashiro, 

伊斯祁登理夜麻 isikye tori yama go after her! 

伊斯祁伊斯祁 isikye isikye After her! After her! 

阿賀波斯豆麻迩 a ga pasiduma ni Follow after my beloved spouse, 

伊斯岐阿波牟加母 isikiapamu kamo and catch up and meet her. 

This phonogram appears in Shoki poetry twice: 

NSK 23 

異能知能 inoti no You young men who 

摩曾祁務比苔破 masokyemu pito pa are so full of life— 

多々瀰許莽 tatami komo take a branch of white oak of 

弊愚利能夜摩能 pyeguri no yama no multi-layered Mount Heguri. 


志邏伽之餓延塢 sirakasi ga ye wo Stick in your hair, 

于受珥左勢 uzu ni sase and adorn your head. 

許能固 kono kwo Even you, my child. 

This phonogram is used four times in the songs of the Footprints of the 
Buddha: 

BSS 5 

伊可奈留夜 ika naru ya What kind of person 

比止尓伊麻世可 pito ni imase ka was this, who steps on rock 

伊波乃宇閇乎 ipa no upe wo as if it were dirt 

都知止布美奈志 tuti to puminasi and formed a print 

阿止乃祁留良牟 ato nokyeruramu that has remained? 

多布刀久毛阿留可 taputwoku mo aru ka How awe-inspiring that is! 

The graph 祁 also appears in the imperial edicts of Shoku Nihongi. One 
example appears in edict dated 749: 教祁牟事不過不失家門不荒自弖天皇 
WOSIPEkyemu KOTO AYAMATAZU USINAPAZU IPYEKADWO ARASAZU SITE SUMYERA 
GA… “And as [the emperor] instructs the people, without fault, without loss, 
without leaving houses devastated, [you, the people, should...]” (SM 13). 

 

家 


OJ: kye OC: *krâ 

LH: ka EMC: kaɨ GO: ke KN: ka 

NOM: gia, nhà SV: gia SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, but may ultimately originate from the 
PBS. Based on the Chinese and Sino-Xenic evidence, one would expect 家 to 
be used to transcribe /ka/ not /kye/. While 家 does not survive in the Paekche 
orthographic corpus, the following does appear in the Koguryŏ orthographic 
corpus: 家古龍羅城 *kakoloŋra fortress (in the land of *risan [利残國]). I thus 
theorize that the OJ reading of kye preserved a glide, as seen in the SV and Chữ 
Nôm form gia (*kia > kye), which form may have been preserved in Sino- 
Paekche. 

The earliest datable usage of this phonogram appears on the epitaph of Ō no 
Yasumaro (729) in the toponym 都家郷 ‘Tukye Village.’ This phonogram also 
appears in the liturgies: 官 官 爾 仕 奉 留 人 等 乃 過 犯 家牟 雑 雑 罪 乎 
TUKASADUKASA ni TUKAPEMATUru PITODOMO no AYAMATI WOKASIkyemu 
KUSAGUSA [NO] TURMI wo “…the various transgressions that we believe have 
been committed by the people who serve in the various governmental offices… 
(NT 10). 

This phonogram appears only once in the poetry of Shoki: 

NSK 105 

于泥備椰摩 unebwi yama Though the trees 

虚多智于須家苔 kotati usukyedo are sparse on Mount Unebi, 

多能彌介茂 tanomi kamo is it the young Ketsu 

氣菟能和區呉能 ketu no wakugwo no who has hidden himself there 

虚茂羅勢利祁牟 komoraserikyemu hoping for support? 

Man’yōshū uses several phonograms for /kye/, but 家 is the most popular. 
Ōno’s count claims that there are 161 examples of 家 in the poetry (1977:381– 
383). One example, supposedly composed by Tenmu in 679, is given below in 


MYS 25, where Tenmu poetically recalls events from the year 671 when he fled 
to Yoshino to prepare for the uprising later known as the Jinshin Disturbance. 

MYS 25 

三吉野之 MIYOSINWO NO The snow was falling 

耳我嶺尓 MIMIGA GA MINE ni continuously on 

時無曽 TOKI NAKU so Mimiga Peak 

雪者落家留 YUKI PA PURIkyeru in Miyoshino. 

 

計 


OJ: kye OC: *kîh 

LH: keih EMC: kɛj GO: ke KN: kei 

NOM: kễ, kẽ, kê SV: kế SK: kyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The earliest example is in the Ōtono-sai 
liturgy: 引結幣留葛目能緩比取葺計留草乃…蘇蘇伎無久 PIKIMUSUbyeru 
TUNAME no YUTUpi, TORI PUkyeru KUSA no...swoswoki NAku ‘So that the knots 
pulled tight do not come loose, and the thatch with which the roof is thatched 
does not get disturbed...’ (NT 8). This phonogram appears once in the poetry of 
Shoki: 

NSK 6 

阿軻娜磨廼 akadama no The radiant globe 

比訶利播阿利登 pikari pa ari to is wonderfully brilliant, 

比鄧播伊珮耐 pito pa ipyedo so people may say, 

企弭我譽贈比志 kimi ga yosopisi but I have now realized 

多輔妬勾阿利計利 taputwoku arikyeri your brilliance is the finest. 

This phonogram was somewhat popular in the days of the Man’yōshū poets. 
Ōno (1977:383–384) counts 25 examples of 計 in the anthology. The oldest 
example appears in poem MYS 25. 

MYS 25 

間無曽 MA NAKU so The rain was falling 

雨者零計類 AME PA PURIkyeru without ceasing there. 

其雪乃 SONO YUKI no And like the continously 

時無如 TOKI NAKI GA GOTO falling snow, 

其雨乃 SONO AME no like the unceasingly 

間無如 MA NAKI GA GOTOKU falling rain, 

隈毛不落 KUMA mo OTIZU I came filled with thoughts 

念乍叙来 OMOPITUTU zo KOSI without fail at every turn 

其山道乎 SONO YAMA MITI wo on that mountain path. 

This phonogram is also used once in Shoku Nihongi, in the name 志計志麻 
呂 Sikyesi Maro (769.5.25). 

 

鷄 


OJ: kye OC: kê 

LH: ke EMC: kɛj GO: ke KN: kei 

NOM: ke SV: kê SK: kyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This graph appears in Shoki in the 
annotational notes once, and 19 times in the poetry. The note is: 雄誥此云烏多 
鷄縻 “ ‘Male ferocity’ is known as wotakyebwi” (NSG). 


NSK 20 

椰句毛多菟 yakumwo tatu Endowed with power 

伊頭毛多鷄流餓 idumwo takyeru ga the hilt of the Izumo 

波鷄流多知 pakyeru tati warrior’s sword 

菟頭邏佐波磨枳 tudura sapa maki is indeed magnificient— 

佐微那辭珥阿波禮 samwi nasi ni apare sadly it has no blade. 

This phonogram is also used in Man’yōshū 19 times: 

MYS 312 

昔者社 MUKASI KOSO Surely anciently 

難波居中跡 nanipa WINAKA TO it was called the rural area 

所言奚米 IPAREkyeme of Naniwa, but now 

今者京引 IMA MIYAKWOBIKI the metropolis has moved 

都備仁鷄里 MIYAKWObwinikyeri and it is more like a capital city. 

This phonogram appears once in the Bussoku stele poetic sequence. 

BSS 15 

久須理師波 kusurisi pa As for physicians 

都祢乃母阿礼等 tune no mo aredo there are the commons ones, 

麻良比止乃 marapito no but the present physican 

伊麻乃久須理師 ima no kusurisi who is a stranger, 

多布止可理家利 taputokarikyeri he is worthy of honor. 

米太志加利鷄利 medasikarikyeri He is worthy of respect. 

 

介 


OJ: kye OC: *krê(t)s 

LH: kɛs EMC: kăih GO: kai, ke KN: ka 

NOM: giới SV: giới SK: kay, kal 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The first problem to address is Ōno’s 
claim (1962:110) that 介 was never used as ke (I believe he has reference to 
kye). He claims that 介 never appears in Man’yōshū, but this is simply not true. 
For example, MYS 4047 has the stanza 介敷乃日波 kyepu no PI pa “this one 
day today.” It is true that 介 is rarely used, but used it is, and should be 
recognized. The change from ka to kye is due to a change in Chinese phonology. 
EMC has kăih, while LMC has kja:j (Pulleyblank 1991:155). 

This usage of kye appears a few times in Man’yōshū as well as in Hitachi 
fudoki. This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, but there it is read /ka/ 
(which see). 

This graph is used twice in Book 18 of Man’yōshū to represent kye and twice 
to represent gye. 

MYS 4047 

多流比賣野 tarupimye NO While we row along 

宇良乎許藝都追 ura wo kogitutu the bay of Princess Taru 

介敷乃日波 kyepu no PI pa please merrily enjoy yourselves 

多努之久安曽敝 tanwosiku asobye on this one day today. 

移比都支尓勢牟 ipituginisemu I will continue to say that. 

In Hitachi fudoki we find one example of this graph: 俗語謂鮭祖須介 ‘In 
the vernacular the parent of “salmon” is called sukye.’ It is thus curious that Ōno 
(1977:848–852) makes no mention of this graph in the same fudoki. 


谿 


OJ: kye OC: *khê 

LH: khe EMC: khiei GO: ke KN: kei 

NOM: khê, khe SV: khê SK: kyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram appears only in 
Man’yōshū, in two poems (MYS 476 and MYS 3851). 

MYS 476 

吾王 WA GA OPOKIMI As it did not occur to me 

天所知牟登 AME SIRASAmu to what it meant that our lord 

不思者 OMOPANEBA rules the heavens 

於保尓曽見谿流 opo ni so MIkyeru I had stared at it without thinking, 

和豆香蘇麻山 waduKA swoma YAMA Mount Wazuka with its timber. 

 

價 


OJ: kye OC: *krâh 

LH: kah MC: kɛ: GO: ke KN: ka 

NOM: giá SV: giá SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only in Man’yōshū, found in 
one poem: 

MYS 217 

梓弓 ADUSAYUMI I also hear the rumors 

音聞吾母 OTO KIKU WARE mo ringing like the catalpa bow 

髣髴見之 OPONI MIsi and regretting that I have 

事悔敷乎 KOTO KUYASIKI wo only seen it faintly, 

布栲乃 SIKITAPE no wrapped with arms as pillows, 

手枕纒而 TAMAKURA MAKITE soft like bedding, and we 

劔刀 TURUGI TATI would have slept, our bodies 

身二副寐價牟 MWI ni SOPE NEkyemu together like swords. 

 

賈 


OJ: kye OC: *krâh 

LH: kah MC: kɛ: GO: kai KN: ka 

NOM: giá SV: giả SK: ka, kwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage is quite rare, appearing three 
times in the second imperial edict in Shoku Nihongi: 汝父藤原大臣乃仕奉賈流 
状乎婆建内宿禰乃仕奉賈流事止同事叙止勅而治賜慈賜賈利 MIMASI [NO] TITI 
PUDIPARA OPO-OMI no TUKAPEMATURIkyeru SAMA woba TAKESI UTI [NO] sukune 
no TUKAPEMATURIkyeru KOTO to OYAZI KOTO zo to NORITAMAPITE WOSAMYE 
TAMAPI MEGUMITAMAPIkyeri ‘We proclaim that the circumstances of the service 
rendered by your father, the Minister Fujiwara, are the same as the service 
rendered by Takeshi Uchi, and he (your father) was cherished [by the former 
sovereign] (SM 2).’ 

 

結 


OJ: kye OC: *kît 

LH: ket EMC: kɛt GO: keti KN: ketu 

NOM: kết, kiết, cứt SV: kết SK: kyel 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram appears but once in 
Man’yōshū. 

MYS 644 

今者吾羽 IMA PA A PA Now I am so lonely 

和備曽四二結類 wabwiso sinikyeru I cannot stand it. 

氣乃緒尓 IKI no WO ni My lord who was my lifeline— 

念師君乎 OMOPIsi KIMI wo When I think that I 

縦左久思者 YURUsaku OMOPYEBA let you go.... 

 

係 


OJ: kye OC: *kêh or *ɡêh 

LH: keh or ɡeh EMC: kɛj or ɣɛj GO: ke KN: kei 

NOM: hễ, hệ SV: hệ SK: kyey, hyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram only appears as a 
phonogram in Man’yōshū, and then only in one name: 石川賀係女郎 Princess 
ISIKAPA Kakye. 

 

稽 


OJ: kye OC: *kî or *khîʔ 

LH: kei or kheiʔ EMC: kiei LMC: kjiaj GO: ke KN: kei 

NOM: ghe SV: kể SK: kyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in Shoki twice in the 
annotational notes, and four times in the poetry. 梟師此云多稽屢 “A strong, 
evil ruler is known as takyeru” (NSG). The Chinese word 梟師 means a 
chieftain leading a group of bandits, but the Japanese word simply means a 
courageous man. 

NSK 79 

耶麼能謎能 yamanobye no I have no regrets 

故思麼古喩衞爾 kwosimakwo yuwe ni parting with my prized 

比登涅羅賦 pito derapu eight horses we show off— 

宇麼能耶都擬播 uma no yatugwi pa all because of the woman, 

嗚思稽矩謀那斯 wosikyeku mo nasi Yamanobe Koshimako. 

 

啓 


OJ: kye OC: *khîʔ 

LH: kheiʔ EMC: khieiʔ LMC: khjiaj GO: kei KN: kei 

NOM: khải SV: khải SK: kyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears only once in Shoki in the 
poetry. 

NSK 96 

伊麻娜以播孺底 imada ipazute The dawn has already come 

阿開儞啓梨 akenikyeri before I have been able 

倭蟻慕 wagimwo to confess my feelings, my love. 

 


溪 


OJ: kye OC: *khê 

LH: khe EMC: khiei GO: ke KN: kei 

NOM: khê, khe SV: khê SK: kyey 

Usage / History: 

See 谿 OJ: kye above. 

 

異 


OJ: kye OC: *ləkh 

LH: jəh EMC: jiɨh GO: i KN: i 

NOM: dị SV: dị, rị SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ kye ‘strange.’ This usage appears in 
Man’yōshū 15 times. 

MYS 491 

河上乃 KAPA NO PE no Please come to me 

伊都藻之花乃 ituMO NO PANA no my beloved, like the flower 

何時々々 ITUMO ITUMO of the ever-weed by the river, 

来益我背子 KIMASE WA GA SEKWO evermore, evermore; 

時自異目八方 TOKIziKYEME YAMO there is never a bad time. 

 

兼 


OJ: kyemu OC: *kêm(s) 

LH: kem(h) EMC: kiem(h) GO: kemu KN: kemu 

NOM: kiêm, kem, kèm SV: kiêm SK: kyem 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only in Man’yōshū. There 
are 29 examples of this usage, according to Ōno (1962:518). Of these, 24 
examples represent the tentative retrospective kyemu. The other five examples 
are stative verbs with a tentative suffix. Below is an example of each. 

MYS 9 

莫囂圓隣 nacuh-oi tolal-in When I look up at 

之大相七兄爪謁氣 thyeta-po-ni-ke-ca-mud-ke the evening moon, I asked— 

吾瀬子之 WA GA SEKWO GA at the base of 

射立為兼 ITATASERIkyemu the sacred oak tree that 

五可新何本 ITUkasi ga MOTO my beloved had planted. 

Thus this is actually the remnant of a Paekche or Silla poem, the first two 
stanzas preserving the Old Korean usage, while the last three stanzas have been 
converted into Old Japanese (cf. Vovin 2002). The fourth stanza ends with kyemu. 

MYS 1784 

海若之 WATATUMI NO Which deity of the sea 

何神乎 IDURE NO KAMWI wo should we pray to 

齊祈者歟 INORABA KA so that our ship 

徃方毛来方毛 YUKU SA mo KI SA mo will depart and return 

船之早兼 PUNE NO PAYAkyemu more quickly? 

 

監 


OJ: kyemu OC: *krâm 

LH: kam EMC: kam GO: kemu KN: kamu 

NOM: giám SV: giam, giám SK: kam 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only in Man’yōshū seven 
times. 

MYS 134 

石見尓有 IPAMI nARU Will my beloved 

高角山乃 TAKATU NO YAMA no see that I am waving 

木間従文 KO NO MA YU mo my sleeve through the trees 

吾袂振乎 WA GA SWODE PURU wo on Mount Takatsu 

妹見監鴨 IMWO MIkyemu KAMO in the land of Iwami? 

 

險 


OJ: kyemu OC: *hŋramʔ 

LH: hɨamʔ or hɨamʔ EMC: xjämʔ, xjɐmʔ GO: kemu KN: kemu 

NOM: hiểm, hiếm, hẻm SV: hiểm SK: hem 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears twice in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1118 

古尓 INISIPYE ni Did the people anciently 

有險人母 ARIkyemu PITO mo come here also 

如吾等架 WA GA GOto ka and like me adorn their hair 

弥和乃桧原尓 miwa no PIBARA ni with sprigs from 

挿頭折兼 KAZASIWORIkyemu Hibara in Miwa? 

This poem, attributed to Hitomaro, contains two examples of graphs used to 
represent kyemu: 險 and 兼. 

 

 


M 

 

 

馬 



OJ: ma OC: *mrâʔ 

LH: maʔ EMC: maʔ GO: me KN: ba 

NOM: mã SV: mã SK: ma 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in many titles in Wei zhi: 兕 
馬觚 *si-ma-kɔ, 伊支馬 *i-ke-ma, 彌馬升 *me-ma-səgu, and 彌馬獲支 
*me-ma-we-ke. There are several instances of toponyms on the ancient peninsula 
that also include 馬 as found in the Chinese chronicles: 馬韓國 *ma-gar 
domain, 乾馬國 *kɑn-ma domain, 彌烏邪馬國 *me-ɔ-ya-ma domain, and 走 
漕馬國 *tso-dzou-ma domain. It also appears in a fragment of the no longer 
extant Koryŏgi ‘Record of Koguryŏ’: 馬 多 山 ‘Mount Mata’ (Takeuchi 
1977:37). 

This phonogram also appears in early transcriptions for toponyms recorded 
in Nihon shoki, such as 對馬嶋 Island of Tusima, a usage apparently inherited 
from the Wei zhi scribes, and 但馬國 Tadima Province. 

Perhaps because of the semantics ‘horse,’ and the common usage of this 
graph, it was generally avoided as a phonogram by the Japanese. The very 
conservative Kojiki never uses this graph, and Nihon shoki only for a few select 
toponyms and surnames, as noted above. Man’yōshū employs this phonogram 11 
times in the anthology. 

MYS 57 

引馬野尓 PIKUmaNWO ni Go into the Hikuma Moor 

仁保布榛原 nipopu PARIPARA with the field of black alder’s 

入乱 IRIMIDARE ablaze in autumn color 

衣尓保波勢 KOROMO nipopase and color your robes 

多鼻能知師尓 tabi no SIRUsi ni as a token of your journey. 

 

麻 


OJ: ma OC: *mrâi 

LH: mai > ma EMC: ma GO: ma KN: ba 

NOM: ma SV: ma SK: ma 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, and appears in Wei zhi in the toponym 
邪麻 *ya-ma. Wei zhi also mentions a king of Puyo known as 麻余 *Ma-yɑ. 
This phonogram also appears on the Suda Hachiman mirror inscription (ca. 503), 
in the name of the palace, 斯麻 *sie-ma, the same representation found on the 
Inariyama tumulus sword inscription. 

This phonogram also appears in several texts on the peninsula. On the 
Kwangkaytho stele we find the toponym 卑斯麻鴨廬 *pie-sie-ma-ep-lɑ. On the 
epitaph of the Paekche King, King Myeng, his name while he was alive is 
preserved as 斯麻 *sie-ma. 

This phonogram also appears in early texts in Japan. It appears in a poem 
supposedly written by Prince Shōtoku recorded in Jōgū shōtoku hōō teisetsu: 


美加彌乎須 mikami wosu Mount Tabasami 

多婆佐美夜麻乃 tabasami yama no that rules from above— 

阿遅加気尓 adikake ni alas, I stood there 

比止乃麻乎之志 pito no mawosisi in the shade of the aji tree, 

和何於保支美波母 wa ga opokimi pamo begging our master’s return. 

This phonogram is used 17 times in the liturgies: 持由麻波利仕奉禮留幣帛 
乎 、 神 主 祝 部 等 受 賜 弖 MOTIyumapari TUKAPEMATUreru MITEGURA wo 
KAMUNUSI PAPURIBYERA UKETAMAPARIte “…the offerings presented that have 
been purified are received and presented by the shrine officiators and the ritual 
officiators…” (NT 1). It also appears on a number of mokkan: 麻呂 …maro 
(MK 2062), 賀麻流魚一隻 ‘one kamaru fish’ (unnumbered tablet), 和岐弖麻 
宇須多加牟奈波阿都止毛々…多无比止奈志止麻宇須 wakite mausu 
takamuna pa atu to mwomwo…tamupi to nasi to mausu ‘In a separate tag we 
declare that the bamboo shoots…and peaches and pears…’ (unnumbered tablet). 

This is the main graph used in Kojiki and Man’yōshū to transcribe ma. From 
Kojiki we find 美斗能麻具波比 mitwo no magupapi ‘sexual intercourse’ (KG), 
布斗麻迩 putwo mani ‘divination with a stag shoulder blade’ (KG), and 美須麻 
流 misumaru ‘circle of jewels on a string’ (as a necklace or bracelet, KG). 

KK 14 

多多那米弖 tatanamete With our shields arrayed 

伊那佐能夜麻能 inasa no yama no I have fought many battles 

許能麻用母 ko no ma ywo mo on Mount Inasa; 

伊由岐麻毛良比 iyuki mamworapi I have kept the watch 

多多加閇婆 tatakapeba from between the trees. 

和禮波夜惠奴 ware pa ya wenu Thus I am famished. 

志麻都登理 simatutori Birds of the islands— 

宇上加比賀登母 úkapi ga tomo come now to my rescue, 

伊麻須氣爾許泥 ima sukenikone you friends of the cormorants. 

This is also one of the main graphs used in Nihon shoki for ma, where it is 
used 13 times in annotational notes, and 39 times in the poetry: 睩、此云麻用 
弭枳 “ ‘eyebrows’ are to be read maywobiki” (NSG), 典馬、此云于麻柯毘 
“ ‘equerry’ is to be read umakapi” (NSG). 

NSK 124 

于知波志能 utipasi no Come out, child 

都梅能阿素弭爾 tume no aswobi ni to play at the edge of 

伊提麻栖古 idemase kwo the plank bridge. 

多麻提能伊鞞能 tamade no ipye no Mistress Yaheko of 

野鞞古能度珥 yapyekwo no twozi the Tamade House. 

伊提麻志能 idemasi no There will be no regrets 

倶伊播阿羅珥茹 kui pa arazi zo if you come out. 

伊提麻西古 idemase kwo Come out, child— 

多麻提能鞞能 tamade no ipye no Mistress Yaheko of 

野鞞古能度珥 yapyekwo no twozi the Tamade House. 

This phonogram appears in Man’yōshū 1006 times. 

MYS 4 

玉尅春 TAMAKIPARU On the great moor of Uchi, 

内乃大野尓 UTI no OPONWO ni the place of gemstone cutting, 


馬數而 UMA NAMETE the horses are likely lined up, 

朝布麻須等六 ASA pumasuRAMU trampling the morning grass, 

其草深野 SONO KUSABUKANWO that field of deep grass. 

This phonogram appears 34 times in the Bussoku stele poems. 

BBS 6 

麻須良乎乃 masurawo no As we gaze at the trodden 

須々美佐岐多知 susumi sakitati footprints of the captain 

布賣留阿止乎 pumyeru ato wo who had gone on ahead 

美都々志乃波牟 mitutu sinopamu we will yearn for him; 

多太尓阿布麻弖尓 tada ni apu made ni until we meet him directly; 

麻佐尓阿布麻弖尓 masa ni apu made ni until we truly meet him. 

 

末 


OJ: ma, matu OC: *mât 

LH: mat EMC: mwât GO: mati, matu KN: batu 

NOM: mạt, mượt SV: mạt SK: mal 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in a Wa toponym, 末盧 
*mɑt-lɔ. As this transcription is preserved by the Chinese chroniclers, we must 
not ignore the final -t. This phonogram also appears on Silla stelae. On the Silla 
King Sinhung stele commemorating a hunt at Hamcwu we find what appears to 
be part of a name 末買 *mat-mɛ, and then a fuller name 沙喙尹知奈末 *sahyɑs 
Juin-te of the 11th rank (奈末). Also, on the Silla Namsan first stele we find 
a fragment of what appears to be a toponym 阿良村末□ *a-la Village Mat-X. 

The earliest example of this phonogram in Japanese appears in wooden 
tablets excavated from the old Fujiwara Palace (fl. 694–710) ruins, with the name 
久米末呂 Kume Maro (MK 3396). This phonogram appears in Kojiki only once, 
in the record of Chūai: 末羅県 Matura AGATA ‘District of Matsura’ (KG). 

This phonogram appears three times in the songs of Nihon shoki. 

NSK 18 

瀰磨紀 mimakwi Woe is Mimaki 

異利寐胡播揶 iribikwo paya Iribiko! 

飫廼餓烏塢 ono ga wo wo Occupying himself 

志齊務苔 sisemu to with a princess, 

農殊末句志羅珥 nusumaku sirani unaware that someone is 

比賣那素寐殊望 pimye na swobi su mo waiting to take his life. 

This phonogram appears in the poetry of Man’yōshū a total of 68 times. 

MYS 904 

地祇 KUNITU KAMWI I bow my head to the ground 

布之弖額拜 pusite NUKADUKI before the deities of earth; 

可加良受毛 kakarazu mo whether he be spared 

可賀利毛 kakari mo or whether he be taken ill, 

神乃末尓麻尓等 KAMWI no mani mani to it is up to the will of the deities. 

 

昧 


OJ: ma OC: *mə̂ s 

LH: məs EMC: mwậih GO: mai KN: bai 

NOM: mụi SV: muội SK: moy 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This usage is preserved in quotes from 
Paekche sources as recorded in Nihon shoki, in the record of Kinmei: 甲背昧奴 
Kapupai Mana. This reading as preserved in Shoki seems somewhat suspicious, 
but consider that there is a variation on this person’s name in the record of Keitai: 
麻那甲背 Mana Kapupai. The inversion of 甲背 Kapupai is difficult to explain, 
but as the compilers of Shoki may have not completely understood the 
orthography in their sources, it is not difficult to see this kind of metathesis 
occurring. What is beyond doubt is that these two spellings transcribe the same 
name. 

Other examples with this graph in Nihon shoki include names like 將徳白昧 
淳 Paku Maziun of the seventh rank. This same name is preserved in the 
Gangōji engi as 自昧淳, but surely Nihon shoki has the correct spelling (with 白 
instead of 自). Later this same graph is used for OJ me (see OJ me). 

 

滿 


OJ: ma OC: *mânʔ 

LH: manʔ EMC: mwânʔ GO: mamu KN: ban 

NOM: mãn, mởn SV: mãn SK: man 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It is preserved in one name from 
Paekche source documents that became reference material for Nihon shoki: 木􀀀 
致 Moku Manti. It also appears in some Nara era documents to transcribe the 
popular name Maro 􀀀侶. This phonogram also appears once in Nihon shoki: 
蘇賀􀀀智宿禰 Swoga Mati Sukune. 

It is used only once in Man’yōshū, because it was more popular as a 
semantogram for the verb mitiru ‘to be full’ or ‘to fill up.’ 

MYS 867 

枳美可由伎 kimi ga yuki Long are the days since 

氣那我久奈理奴 ke nagaku narinu you took your journey. 

奈良遅那留 naradi naru The trees in the courtyard 

志􀀀乃己太知母 sima no kodati mo along the Nara road 

可牟佐飛仁家里 kamusapwinikyeri have taken on an antique air. 

 

莫 


OJ: ma, maku OC: *mâk 

LH: mak EMC: mâk GO: maku KN: baku 

NOM: mạc SV: mạc SK: mak, mwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It is preserved in Koryŏgi in a noble 
rank: 莫何々羅支 Makgagaraki (Takeuchi 1977:34), though Yoshida argues 
this is a miscopied version of 莫何羅繍支 Makgasiuki (1977:10). This 
phonogram appears in several names of people preserved in Paekche source 
material that was subsequently quoted by the compilers of Nihon shoki: 灼莫古 
將軍 General Yak-Makwo, 前部奈率鼻利莫古 Piri Makwo of the sixth rank 
of the Forward Section, 徳率東城子莫古 Tong-ziau Simakwo of the fourth 
rank, 物部莫奇武連 MONONOBYE Magamu MURAZI, and 竹斯物部莫奇委沙 
奇 MONONOBYE Maga Wasaka of Tukusi. Notice that in the case of Paekche 
individuals the graph 莫 always precedes a velar-initial graph, which as is true 


of other inscriptions, appears to alert the reader that the following vowel is short. 
In the case of what appear to be Japanese individuals, the graph 莫 is simply 
read ma. This phonogram is used sparingly in mokkan transcriptions: 比莫嶋 
Pima Island, or perhaps Pimaku Island (MKK 9:13). 

Perhaps because of the attending final velar, this graph fell out of use in 
general, but it is still found in three poems in Man’yōshū, with each one 
representing maku: 散莫惜毛 TIRAmaku WOSI mo ‘how regrettable that (the 
autumn leaves) must scatter’ (MYS 1517); 仁寶布黄葉之 散莫惜裳 nipopu 
MWOMIDI NO / TIRAmaku WOSI MO ‘how regrettable that the brilliant autumn 
leaves must scatter’ (MYS 2187); 此九月之 過莫呼 伊多母為便無見 
KONO NAGATUKWI NO / SUGWImaku wo / ita mo SUbye NAMI ‘and there is nothing 
that I can do about the passing of the ninth month’ (MYS 3329). 

 

明 


OJ: ma OC: *mraŋ 

LH: mɨaŋ EMC: mjɐŋ GO: miyau KN: mei 

NOM: minh, miêng SV: minh SK: myeng 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It appears in a very early representation 
of the name of Soga no Umako as preserved in the Gangōji temple record: 巷宜 
有明子 Swoga Umakwo. Much could be said about this somewhat cryptic usage, 
but suffice it to say that 有明子 transcribes Umakwo. This might be a vestige of 
OC, where, if the final velar nasal is ignored, 明 gives us ma. 

 

磨 


OJ: ma OC: *mâi 

LH: mɑi > ma EMC: mwâ GO: ma KN: ba 

NOM: mài SV: ma, mạ SK: ma 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The earliest usage is for the toponym 播 
磨 Parima, found in Nihon shoki and Jōgū shōtoku hōō teisetsu. Kujiki preserves 
an earlier usage, 針間, which is also preserved in Kojiki. Thes phonogram 磨 is 
used in Hizen fudoki to write 球磨 Kuma. 

This phonogram is used 15 times in annotational notes and eight times in 
song in Nihon shoki: 傴僂、此云倶豆磨 “ ‘(The name) 傴僂 is read kutuma” 
(NSG). 

NSK 2 

阿妹奈屢夜 ame naru ya In the heavens 

乙登多奈婆多廼 oto tanabata no the jewels strung upon 

汗奈餓勢屢 unagaseru the string hung around 

多磨廼彌素磨屢廼 tama no misumaru no the neck of the Weaver Maiden 

阿奈陀磨波夜 anatama pa ya are very beautiful— 

彌多爾 mitani like the beauty of him who 

輔柁和柁羅須 puta watarasu shines over two hills 

阿泥素企多伽避顧禰 adisuki takapikwone Ajisuki Takahikone. 

 

萬 


OJ: ma, mani OC: *mâns 

LH: muɑnh EMC: mjwɐnh GO: mamu KN: ban 

NOM: vạn, vàn SV: vạn SK: man 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in the Mino Census of 702 
in names like 萬呂 Maro, 萬賣 Mamye, 阿萬賣 Amamye, and 古萬 
Kwoma. The phonogram 萬 does not appear in Kojiki, other than in the name of 
Yasumaro, the finisher of the work: 安萬侶 YASUmaro. This phonogram 
appears in Nihon shoki as a phonogram only four times to write the name Maro 
(萬侶 or 萬里). This phonogram is found often on mokkan inscriptions, many 
times to write the name Maro (万呂 or 万侶). Other examples include 万由 
mayu ? (MK 1174), 古万 kwoma ‘horse’ (MK 2896), □部連(儈)万里 XBYE 
MURAZI Somari (unnumbered tablet). 

While this phonogram was not used in poetry in Kojiki or Nihon shoki, it 
does appear in Man’yōshū 22 times. 

MYS 883 

於登爾吉岐 oto ni kiki I have heard the rumors 

目爾波伊麻太見受 ME nipa imada MIzu but have not seen it yet— 

佐容比賣我 saywo pimye ga Mount ‘I-will-wait-for-you,’ 

必禮布理伎等敷 pire puriki topu Mount Matsura where 

吉民萬通良楊満 kimi matura yama Princess Sayo waved her scarf. 

This phonogram is also used twice in Man’yōshū to represent mani. 

MYS 3291 

三芳野之 MIYOSINWO NO On the mountains of Yoshino 

真木立山尓 MAKWI TATU YAMA ni where stand Podocarpus trees, 

青生 AWOKU OPURU the roots of mountain sedge 

山菅之根乃 YAMASUGE NO NE no cover in a grassy way, 

慇懃 NEMOKORO NI likewise I am dispatched 

吾念君者 A GA OMOPU KIMI PA according to the will 

天皇之 OPOKIMI NO of my lord, the great ruler, 

遣之萬々 MAKE NO mani mani on whom I think fondly of, 

夷離 PINAZAKARU who said to rule over 

國治尓登 KUNI WOSAME ni to the domain which is distant. 

群鳥之 MURA TORI NO If I depart in the morning, 

朝立行者 ASADATI INABA like a flock of birds, 

後有 OKURETARU will I yearn 

我可将戀奈 ARE KA KWIPWIMU na for the one left behind? 

 

摩 


OJ: ma OC: *mâi 

LH: mɑi > ma EMC: mwâ GO: ma KN: ba 

NOM: NA SV: ma SK: ma 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and it appears quite frequently on 
mokkan: 志摩国志摩郡 Sima Province, Sima District (MK 2248), 石見国迩 
摩郡 IPAMI Province Nima District (unnumbered tablet). 

It appears 24 times in Kojiki, but only three times in the poetry: 久米能摩伊 
刀比賣 Kume no Maitwo Pimye (KG), 多遲摩國 tadima [NO] KUNI ‘Tajima 
Province’ (KG), and 布斗摩迩迩占相而 putwo mani ni URANAPITE ‘divine 
according to the fat (bones)’ (KG). 


KK 52 

淤岐幣迩波 okipye ni pa There are boats 

袁夫泥都羅羅玖 wobune turaraku lined up out in the offing. 

久漏邪夜能 kurwozaya no Black like a sheath 

摩佐豆古和藝毛 masadukwo wagimwo my beautiful beloved, 

玖迩幣玖陀良須 kunipye kudarasu she heads for her home. 

This phonogram appears prominently in Nihon shoki, ten times in 
annotational notes, and 72 times in the poetry: 荒魂此云阿邏瀰多摩 “ ‘The 
violent spirit’ is called aramitama” (NSG). 

NSK 22 

夜摩苔波 yamato pa Yamato is 

區珥能摩倍邏摩 kuni no maporama the most prosperous— 

多々儺豆久 tatanaduku a land ringed by 

阿烏伽枳 awokaki mountains arrayed 

夜摩許莽例屢 yama komoreru as a green, rolling fence. 

夜摩苔之于屢破試 yamato no urupasi Yes, Yamato is beautiful. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, 17 times, but the majority are 
located in Book 5. 

MYS 876 

阿麻等夫夜 amatobu ya How I wish I were a bird 

等利尓母賀母夜 tori ni mogamo ya that flies in the sky, 

美夜故麻提 miyakwo made I would see you off 

意久利摩遠志弖 okuri mawosite all the way to the capital; 

等比可弊流母能 tobikapyeru mono as one who had flown home. 

 

麼 


OJ: ma OC: *mai 

LH: mɨɑi > mɨe EMC: mje LMC: mba GO: ma KN: ba 

NOM: ma, mô SV: mả SK: ma 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Nihon shoki, suggesting 
that it should belong to the CBS, but this phonogram also transcribes ba, which is 
clearly based on LMC mba, so it appears to me that this is a LJS hold over the 
compilers of Shoki included. 

This phonogram appears 12 times in the poetry to represent ma, but never in 
the annotational notes, while 麼 ba appears in both poetry and the annotational 
notes. 

NSK 75 

野麼等能 yamato no On the peaks 

嗚武羅能陀該儞 womura no take ni of the mountains of Yamato, 

之々符須登 sisi pusu to who shall venture forth 

拕例柯 tare ka to stand before 

擧能居登 kono koto the great one and tell him 

飫裒磨陛儞麻嗚須 opomapye ni mawosu where the beast lays waiting? 

This phonogram is rarely used in other works aside from Nihon shoki, but it 
is found in Buddhist texts, sometimes to transcribe Kaumārī 嬌麼哩, one of the 
seven divine mothers, or 達麼, a variant transcription for dharma. A Buddhist 
connection helps explain the usage 曩娑麼提 nasamade, which is possibly a 


truncation of a longer text, found on a wooden tablet from Jōrinji Temple in 
Nagahama City in Shiga Prefecture. 

 

魔 


OJ: ma OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: ma GO: ma KN: ba 

NOM: ma SV: ma SK: ma 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, though it is seldom used as a phonogram 
because of its semantics, 魔 meaning ghost or demon. Interestingly it is used as 
a phonogram in Nihon shoki in the poetry: 

NSK 24 

阿佐志毛能 asasimwo no The morning frost melts— 

瀰概能佐烏麼志 mike no sawobasi courtiers cross over 

魔弊菟耆瀰 mapyetu kimi the little tree bridge 

伊和哆羅秀暮 iwatarasu mo to and fro from work; 

瀰開能佐烏麼志 mike no sawobasi over the little tree bridge. 

 

莽 


OJ: ma OC: *mâŋʔ 

LH: mɑŋʔ EMC: mwâŋʔ GO: mau KN: bau 

NOM: mãng, mảng SV: mãng SK: mang, mwo, mwu 

Usage / History: 

There is Sino-Xenic evidence that this phonogram actually has two readings. 
SK preserves one reading with /a/ and another with /o/. Miyake (1999:800, 801) 
argues for two different EMC readings for this graph. OJ ma came from EMC 
maŋ, while OJ mo came from EMC məŋ. This phonogram appears in Shoki for 
both OJ ma and mo. I have examined the text of Nihon shoki, and the phonogram 
莽 for ma is found only in Books 3, 11, and 17, while 莽 for mo appears in 
Books 5 and 7. Thus, there is no overlap. I conclude that different scribes relied 
on different orthographic traditions for this phonogram. See 莽 OJ: mo below. 

I place this usage in the LJS, as the Kan-on is bau. This phonogram is used in 
two annotational notes and 28 times in poetry in Nihon shoki: 秀眞國、此云袍 
圖莽句儞 “ ‘Luxuriant-true land’ is read potuma kuni’ (NSG). 

NSK 10 

伊莽波豫 ima pa yo We have now won! 

伊莽波豫 ima pa yo For now we have won! 

阿々時夜塢 aa si ya wo Fools! Serves you right! 

伊莽儾而毛 imada ni mo Have they had enough, 

阿誤豫 ago yo you, my troops? 

伊莽儾而毛 imada ni mo Have they had enough, 

阿誤豫 agwo yo you, my lads? 

 

間 


OJ: ma OC: *krên 

LH: kɛn EMC: kăn GO: kemu KN: kan 

NOM: gian, gián, dán SV: gian, gián, dan SK: kan, ken, han 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ ma ‘interval.’ This usage appears 
rather early, appearing in the Mino Census of 702 in names like 針間 PARIMA, 


and 在間 ARIMA. In Kojiki there is 針間 PARIMA (KG), 手間山 Mount 
TEMA (KG), and 男浅津間若子宿禰王 Prince WOASATUMA WAKUGWO 
Sukune (KG). 

There are a number of examples in Nihon shoki: 嗛間丘 the hill POPOMA 
(NSG), 大間宿禰 OPOMA [NO] Sukune (NSG), and 御間城入彦五十瓊殖天 
皇 Great King MIMAKWI IRIBIKWO INIWE (NSG). This kungana is also used 
fairly widely in Man’yōshū: 八間跡能國者 YAMATO no KUNI PA ‘the land of 
Yamato (is...) (MYS 2); 射等篭荷四間乃 珠藻苅麻須 IRAGO [NO] siMA no 
/ TAMAMO KARImasu ‘cutting the gem weed of Irago Island’(MYS 23); 宇治間 
山 udiMA YAMA ‘Mount Ujima’ (MYS 75). 

 

目 


OJ: ma OC: *muk 

LH: muk EMC: mjuk GO: moku KN: boku 

NOM: mục SV: mục SK: mwok 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader the bound form of the OJ word ma ‘eye.’ 
This usage appears in the Mino Census of 702 in names like 目玉 賣 
MATAMAmye, and 目見 MAMI. This usage also appears in Kojiki in the name 
目弱王 Prince MAYWO. This usage also appears on a number of mokkan, but it 
is difficult to know if these represent ma or me: 長目女 NAGAMAMYE or 
NAGAMEmye (unnumbered tablet), 与利目尓伎 YoriMAniki or YoriMEniki 
(unnumbered tablet). 

There are a number of examples in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3234 

大宮都可倍 OPOMIYA tukape Serving the great palace 

朝日奈須 ASAPI nasu it is beautiful 

目細毛 MAGUPASI mo like the morning sun; 

暮日奈須 YUPUPI nasu it is stunning 

浦細毛 URAGUPASI mo like the evening sun. 

 

信 


OJ: ma OC: *sins 

LH: sinh EMC: sjenh GO: simu KN: sin 

NOM: tin, tín SV: tín SK: sin 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ ma ‘true.’ This usage appears only in 
Man’yōshū, and then only twice, and in the same phrase: 信土之 山川爾 
MATUTI NO / YAMAKAPA ni ‘the river of Mount Matsuchi’ (MYS 1192, 1680). 

 

鬼 


OJ: ma OC: *kuiʔ 

LH: kuiʔ EMC: kjweiʔ GO: kuwi KN: kuwi 

NOM: quỷ SV: quỷ SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ ma ‘ghost, demon.’ This usage appears only 
once in Man’yōshū in 吾戀八鬼目 A GA KWOPWI YAMAME ‘my yearning will 
then cease’ (MYS 3250). 

 


眞 


OJ: ma OC: *tin 

LH: tśin EMC: tśjen GO: simu KN: sin 

NOM: chân SV: chân SK: cin 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ ma ‘true.’ This usage is quite popular 
in mythological stories, suggesting to the reader that the individual in the story 
was true or trustworthy. Examples in Kojiki include 天之眞名井 AME NO 
MANAWI ‘the name of a well in heaven’ (KG), 御眞木天皇 Great King 
MIMAKWI (literally the true-tree, KG), 水 穂眞若 王 Prince MIDUPO 
MAWAKA (literally the true-young prince, KG). This same usage appears in 
Nihon shoki, also: 眞神原 MAKAMWI Plain (NSG), 眞經津鏡 the MAPUTU 
mirror (NSG), and 眞名鹿 MANAKA ‘a true-named stag’ (NSG). This usage 
also appears on many mokkan, most for MABITO (真人), but a few are in other 
words: 石部真佐支 ISIBYE MAsaki (MKK 5:85), 真蘇女 MAswoMYE (MK 
31). This usage also appears in Man’yōshū: 泊瀬山者 眞木立 PATUSE YAMA PA 
/ MAKWI TATU ‘On Mount Hatsuse good trees for lumber stand’ (MYS 45). 

 

喚犬 



OJ: ma OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: NA GO: NA KN: NA 

NOM: NA SV: NA SK: NA 

Usage / History: 

These two graphs are a logographic ‘clue’ where the reader processes the 
Chinese predicate ‘call your dog,’ which conjures up what you say when you call 
a dog: ma. This is used twice in Man’yōshū, as in the following example: 

MYS 2645 

宮材引 MIYAGWI PIKU Like the workers 

泉之追馬喚犬二 IDUMI NO SWOMA ni at Izumi Soma 

立民乃 TATUTAMI no cutting lumber for the palace, 

息時無 YASUMU TOKI NAKU I have no time to do anything 

戀渡可聞 KWOPWIWATARU kamo but continue to long for you. 

 

望 



OJ: maga, magu OC: *maŋ 

LH: muaŋ EMC: mjwaŋ GO: mau KN: bau 

NOM: vọng SV: vọng SK: mang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The writers who used this script 
interpreted the velar nasal as -g- with either a repeat vowel /a/, or a filler vowel 
/u/. One example appears in Harima fudoki in the toponym 望理里 Village of 
Magari. On a wooden tablet is the toponym 参河国寶飫郡望理郷 MIKAPA 
Province Poo District Magari Village (MKK 18:103). 

A document preserved in the Shōsōin contains the toponym 望陁 Maguta. 
This same toponym appears in a headnote to MYS 4351: 望陀郡 Maguta 
District. Nihon shoki also contains this report: 六月丁巳朔己未、大伴連望多 
‘On the first day of the sixth month (of the twelfth year of Tenmu), Ōtomo 
Murazi Maguta passed away.’ On an excavated wooden tablet is 天平四年望多 
… Fourth year of Tenpyō (732) Maguta.... 

 


There are several names preserved on excavated wooden tablets, but the 
readings are not completely secure: 佐 伯 望 万 呂 Sapeki Magamaro 
(unnumbered tablet), and □ 県 望 末 呂 … 天 平 九 年 二 月 X-AGATA 
Magamaro… second month of the ninth year of Tenpyō [737] (unnumbered 
tablet). 

 

幕 


OJ: maku OC: *mâk 

LH: mak EMC: mâk GO: maku KN: baku 

NOM: NA SV: mạc, mộ SK: mak 

Usage / History: 

This siniograph belongs to the LJS, and appears three times in Man’yōshū in 
京徃而 戀幕思者 MIYAKWO NI YUKITE / KWOPWImaku OMOPEBA ‘since I will 
think longingly when I return to the capital’ (MYS 1217); 山之将黄變 見幕 
下吉 YAMA NO MWOMITAMU / MImaku SIMO YOSI ‘how nice watching the 
mountains turn with color’ (MYS 2200); 生日社 見幕欲為礼 IKYERU PI KOSO 
/ MImaku PORI SUre ‘How I want to see you while I am yet alive’ (MYS 2592). 

 

米 


OJ: me OC: *mîʔ 

LH: meiʔ EMC: mieiʔ GO: mai KN: bei 

NOM: mễ, mẽ SV: mễ SK: myey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, and appears in one personal name, 難升 
米 *na-nə-səgu-mei. This phonogram is also the oldest graph used in the earliest 
Japanese material. For example, in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu we find names such 
as 久米王 Prince Kume, 蘇我伊奈米宿祢 Swoga Iname [NO] Sukune, and 多 
米王 Prince Tame. A song written by Kose Omi upon the death of Prince 
Shōtoku appears below: 

伊加留我乃 ikaruga no Our Great Ruler’s name 

止美能乎何波乃 tomi no wogapa no will never be forgotten, 

多叡婆許曾 tayeba koso even if the brook 

和何於保支美乃 wa ga opokimi no Tomi in Ikaruga 

弥奈和須良叡米 mina wasurayeme should cease to flow in its bed. 

This phonogram appears seven times in the liturgies: 己乖乖不令在邪意穢 
心無久宮進進米宮勤勤之米弖 ONO GA MUKI MUKI ARASIMEZU ASIKI KOKORO 
KITANAKI KOKORO NAku MIYA SUSUME SUSUme, MIYA TUTUME TUTOME simete 
“…without doing anything self-centered, without a wicked or polluted heart, 
serving in the palace diligently and faithfully…” (NT 8). This phonogram 
appears on a number of wooden tablets: 己乃己米 kono kome ‘this rice’ (MKK 
16:15), 長稲由米由米 NAGAINE yume yume ‘beware of long stalks of rice’ 
(MKK 19:199). 

This is the primary phonogram used in Kojiki, appearing in 吾者到於伊那 
志許米上志許米岐穢國而 ARE PA ina sikome sikomeki KITANAKI KUNI NI ITARITE 
‘I have reached a very hideous, hideous and polluted land…’ (KG). 

KK 54 

夜麻賀多迩 yamagata ni How delightful it is 

麻祁流阿袁那母 makyeru awona mo to pick together even 

岐備比登登 kibwi pito to the greens that were planted 


等母迩斯都米婆 tomo ni si tumeba in the mountain fields, 

多怒斯久母阿流迦 tanwosiku mo aru ka with that person from Kibi. 

Interestingly while this graph appears in Nihon shoki, it is only in a quote 
from Wei zhi: 大夫難斗米 Minister Nan-two-me. Current texts of Wei zhi have 
this name as 難升米. 

This is the principal phonogram used to transcribe me in Man’yōshū, 
appearing about 270 times in the anthology. 

MYS 243 

王者 OPOKIMI PA Our great lord 

千歳二麻佐武 TITOSE NI masamu will exist for a thousand years. 

白雲毛 SIRAKUMWO mo Will there ever come a day 

三船乃山尓 MIPUNE no YAMA ni when the white clouds on 

絶日安良米也 TAYURU PI arame ya Mount Mifune disappear? 

This phonogram also appears in the Bussoku stone poems: 

BSS 1 

美阿止都久留 miato tukuru The resounding sound of 

伊志乃比鼻伎波 isi no pibiki pa the rock where the footprints 

阿米尓伊多利 ame ni itari are carved reaches to heaven; 

都知佐閇由須礼 tuti sape yusure the earth even reverberates. 

知々波々賀多米尓 titi papa ga tame ni for father and mother— 

毛呂比止乃多米尓 moropito no tame ni for all people. 

 

梅 


OJ: me OC: *mê or *mêʔ 

LH: mə EMC: mwậi GO: mai KN: bai 

NOM: mai SV: mai SK: moy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in one annotational note, and 
19 times in song in Nihon shoki: 希見、此云梅豆邏志 “ ‘rarely seen’ is read 
medurasi” (NSG). After this note the text goes on to say, 故時人號其處、曰梅 
豆羅國 “Thus people in that time called that place the land of Medura” (NSG). 

NSK 67 

波那具波辭 panagupasi What beauty and detail 

佐區羅能梅涅 sakura no mede these cherry blossoms have. 

許等梅涅麼 kotomedeba If beauty is the same 

波椰區波梅涅孺 payaku pa medezu then I should have loved sooner: 

和我梅豆留古羅 wa ga meduru kwora my beloved little maidens. 

Interesting that in a song where words like pana ‘blossom’ and sakura 
‘cherry’ appear the graph 梅 ‘plum’ appears four times, surely for literary effect. 

This phonogram is used frequently in Man’yōshū, but it is only used to 
represent ume ‘plum’ 烏梅 (MYS 815, 916, 817, 818, 819, 820, 821, 823, 3901, 
3902, 3903, 4496), 宇梅 (MYS 843, 849, 851, 3904, 3906, 4041, 4497), and 于 
梅 (MYS 864). 

 

迷 


OJ: me OC: *mî 

LH: mei EMC: miei GO: mai, mei KN: bei 

NOM: mê SV: mê SK: mi 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram is also included as representing OJ mye, so it is confusing to 
place it here, but it should be remembered that it appears in Man’yōshū for visual 
effect, and the poet has ignored the strict phonology. Perhaps we could label this 
an ‘eye-rhyme,’ where a connection is made visually with the graph and the 
intended meaning. That single poem is noted below: 

MYS 813 

多良志比咩 tarasi pimye The divine existince, 

可尾能彌許等 kamwi no mikoto Princess Tarashi, 

可良久尓遠 karakuni wo when she went 

武氣多比良宜弖 muketapirakyete to subdue the land of Kara 

彌許々呂遠 mikokoro wo (took two stones) 

斯豆迷多麻布等 sidumetamapu to to soothe her august mind. 

As Ōno notes (1977:657) the intended meaning seems to be that she had 
doubts, and thus soothed her mind when she returned. That is embedded in the 
graph 迷 ‘be perplexed, confused.’ 

There is also one example of this graph in Nihon shoki, in the famous song 
attributed to Shōtoku Taishi: 

NSK 104 

斯那提流 sinateru Starving for want of food 

箇多烏箇夜摩爾 katawokayama ni on Mount Kataoka, 

伊比爾惠弖 ipi ni wete the shining hill, 

許夜勢屢 koyaseru how pitiful is that farmer 

諸能多比等阿波禮 sono tapito apare who has fallen. 

於夜那斯爾 oya nasi ni Surely you were not 

那禮奈理雞迷夜 narenarikyeme ya raised without parents. 

There is no logical reason for OJ me to be transcribed with 迷 here, though 
perhaps we could view it as a graphic mistake (scribal error?) with 米 me. 

 

昧 


OJ: me OC: *mə̂ s 

LH: məs EMC: mwậih GO: mai KN: bai 

NOM: mụi SV: muội SK: moy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Nihon shoki in a single 
poem: 

NSK 1 

夜句茂多兔 yakumo tatu Endowed with power 

伊弩毛夜覇餓岐 idumwo yapyegaki this two-fold Izumo fence— 

兔磨語昧爾 tuma gume ni to conceal ourselves 

夜覇餓枳都倶盧 yapyegaki tukuru I have built this two-fold fence. 

贈廼夜覇餓岐廻 sono yapyegaki we Yes, within this two-fold fence! 

 

毎 


OJ: me OC: *mə̂ ʔ 

LH: məʔ EMC: mwậiʔ GO: mai KN: bai 

NOM: mỗi SV: mỗi SK: moy 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS and appears seven times in song in Nihon 
shoki: 

NSK 86 

於岐毎慕與 okime mo yo Alas Okime, 

阿甫瀰能於岐毎 apumi no okime Okime from Afumi— 

阿須用利簸 asu ywori pa tomorrow you return to hide 

瀰野磨我倶利底 miyamagakurite in the mountains and I will 

彌曳孺哿謨阿羅牟 miyezu kamo aramu will be able to see you no more. 

The Go-on reading is somewhat interesting, because while most manuscripts 
of Hokekyō ongi have mai as the gloss for 毎, one manuscript has mui. If this is 
not a simple error, it might point to an earlier time when there may have been 
two competing Sino-Japanese readings, as the reconstructed Chinese data suggest 
a mid vowel with different heights, depending on when the phonogram was first 
introduced into Japan. 

 

妹 


OJ: me OC: *mə̂ s 

LH: məs EMC: mwậi GO: mai KN: bai 

NOM: NA SV: muội SK: moy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS and appears in two poems in Nihon 
shoki: 

NSK 2 

阿妹奈屢夜 ame naru ya In the heavens, 

乙登多奈婆多廼 oto tanabata no the jewels strung upon 

汗奈餓勢屢 unagaseru the string hung around 

多磨廼彌素磨屢廼 tama no miswomaru no the neck of the Weaver Maiden 

阿奈陀磨波夜 anadama pa ya are very beautiful— 

彌多爾 mita ni like the beauty of him who 

輔柁和柁羅須 puta watarasu shines over two hills, 

阿泥素企多伽避顧禰 adisuki takapikwone Ajisuki Takahikone. 

 

目 


OJ: me OC: *muk 

LH: muk EMC: mjuk GO: moku KN: boku 

NOM: mục SV: mục SK: mwok 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, suggesting to the reader OJ me ‘eye.’ This usage is old, 
appearing in some of the oldest known fragments in Japan. In Jōgū Shōtoku hōō 
teisetsu we find Soga Iname’s name written as 稲目足尼 INAME Sukune. Also 
in the Mino Census of 702 we find names such as 目知賣 MEtimye, 波佐目賣 
PasaMEmye, and 目都良賣 MEturamye. 

There are a few examples of 目 me in Kojiki: 置目 OKIME (KG), 稲目宿 
禰 INAME Sukune (KG), and 長目比賣 NAGAME Pimye (KG). This 
kungana is used extensively in Nihon shoki in names such as 活目津彦根命 
IKUMETUPIKWONE [NO] MIKOTO (NSG), 來目部 KUMEBYE (NSG), 天槵 
津大來目 AMA [NO] KUSITU OPOKUME (NSG), and 磯城縣主大目 OPOME, 
the ruler of SIKWI District (NSG). 


This kungana appears frequently in Man’yōshū poetry, used roughly 120 
times. As Ōno (1977:655) points out, the majority of these usages are employed 
to represent some form of verbal morphology. 

MYS 31 

左散難弥乃 sasanami no Though the water languishes 

志我能 siga no at the great bay 

大和太 OPOwada of Shiga 

與杼六友 yodoMU TOMO where the waves ripple 

昔人二 MUKASI PITO ni will we encounter again 

亦母相目八毛 MATA mo APAME YAmo those people from long ago? 

 

眼 


OJ: me OC: *ŋrə̂ nʔ 

LH: ŋɛnʔ EMC: ŋănʔ GO: gemu KN: gan 

NOM: nhan, nhãn, nhởn SV: nhãn, nhỡn SK: an 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, like 目 above, suggesting OJ me ‘eye.’ This usage 
appears in Nihon shoki twice, once in the name 田眼皇女 Princess TAME 
(NSG), a name that also appears in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu as 多米 tame. 
There is also the name 丹比大眼 Tazipi OPOME (NSG). 

This kungana also appears three times in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 678 

直相而 TADA APITE When we have finally 

見而者耳社 MITE BA NOMWI KOSO met face to face, then the love 

霊剋 TAMAKIPARU I have risked my life for— 

命向 INOTI NI MUKAPU the end of the spirit— 

吾戀止眼 A GA KWOPWI YAMAME will have an end. 

 

海藻 



OJ: me OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: NA GO: NA KN: NA 

NOM: NA SV: NA SK: NA 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ me ‘seaweed’ or ‘lather,’ as 海藻 is 
quite literally ‘sea-algae.’ This usage appears only four times in Man’yōshū. The 
example below uses this twice, once as a logoram ‘seaweed,’ and the second time 
to represent a verbal suffix. 

MYS 3871 

角嶋之 TUNWO SIMA NO The seaweed of 

迫門乃稚海藻者 SETWO no WAKAME PA the straits of Tsuno Island 

人之共 PITO NO MUTA is too tough 

荒有之可杼 ARAKARIsikado for other people, 

吾共者和海藻 WARE TO PA NIKIME but to me it is soft. 

 

彌 



OJ: mi < mye OC: *meʔ 

LH: mieʔ EMC: mjieʔ GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: NA SV: di, ri, nhĩ SK: mi 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, and appears in Wei zhi in many titles: 
彌彌 *me-me, 彌馬獲支 *me-ma-we-ke, 卑彌弓呼 *pe-me-kuŋ-hɔ, and 卑 
彌呼 *pe-me-hɔ. This phonogram also appears in the other ‘barbaric’ sections of 
Wei zhi: 彌加 *me-kɑ, 卑彌 *pe-me, 彌離彌凍国 *me-rɑi-me-toŋ domain. 

This phonogram is also prevalent on the inscriptions of the peninsula. On the 
Kwangkaytho stele we find: 閣彌城 *kak-me fortress, 彌沙 城 *me-sai 
fortress, and 彌鄒城 *me-tsuw fortress. This graph is also found in Paekche 
source materials quoted in Nihon shoki: 彌騰利 Midori, 彌麻沙 Mimasa, and 
彌氐 Mite. 

It is clear that the vocalic nucleus of this graph was [e] in the pre-EMC 
period. This reading was imported into early Japan, likely taught by Yamato’s 
Paekche teachers. This is clear from the vestiges of old Japanese orthography 
preserved in old names. In Jōgū Shōtoku teisetsu the following appears: 吉多斯 
比彌乃彌己等 Kitasi Pimye no mikoto, 等已彌居加斯支移比彌乃彌己等 
Toyo Mikekasikiya Pimye no mikoto, where pimye is written with 彌. Near the 
end of this list of names the compiler has left the following note: 彌字〈或当賣 
音也〉‘The graph 彌 has the same reading as 賣 (*mɛh).’ 

This phonogram appears nine times in the liturgies: 磐根木根履佐久彌弖 
IPANE KINE PUMIsakumite “(the couriers) will stamp through the rocks and the 
roots of trees…” (NT 1). This phonogram appears repeatedly in mokkan 
inscriptions: 由弥五□ ‘five sets(?) of bows (yumi)?’ (unnumbered tablet), 宇 
治部阿弥 UdiBYE Ami (MK 11323), 弥努王 Prince Minu (unnumbered tablet), 
南無阿弥陀仏 namu amida butu ‘words in a Buddhist chant’ (MKK 3:54). 

This phonogram is used rarely in Kojiki, though it does appear in names like 
彌都波能賣神 the deity Mitupanomye (KG), 彌豆麻岐神 the deity Mitumaki 
(KG), and a transcription such as 意富岐彌 opokimi ‘great lord’ (KK 65). 

This is the second most popular graph for mi in Nihon shoki (the most 
popular being 瀰). It appears in eight annotational notes, and 42 times in song: 
御甂、此云彌那陪 “ ‘a pan’ is read minape” (NSG). 

NSK 33 

許能彌企塢 kono miki wo Did the person who 

伽彌鷄武比等破 kamikyemu pito pa brewed this auspicious wine 

曾能菟豆彌 sono tudumi rest his resounding drum 

于輸珥多氐々 usu ni tatete like a grinding mortar, 

于多比菟々 utapitutu and brew this wine 

伽彌鷄梅伽墓 kamikyeme kamo while he sang a song? 

許能彌企能 kono miki no It is strange 

阿椰珥 aya ni how very 

于多娜濃芝 utadanwosi delightful this wine is. 

作沙 sa sa Drink! Drink! 

This phonogram appears 63 times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 31 

左散難彌乃 sasanami no The broad inlet of Shiga 

志我能大和太 siga no OPOwada at Sasanami, though it is 


與杼六友 yodoMU TOMO stagnant and hesitant now, 

昔人二 MUKASI NO PITO ni will it ever meet 

亦母相目八毛 MATA mo APAME YAmo those people from long ago? 

The cursive form of the abbreviated version of this graph results in hiragana 
み (弥 < 弥 < 彌). 

 

美 


OJ: mi OC: *muiʔ 

LH: mɨʔ EMC: mjiʔ GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: mỹ, mỉ, mẻ SV: mĩ SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It appears in a poem supposedly written 
by Prince Shōtoku and is recorded in Jōgū shōtoku hōō teisetsu: 

美加彌乎須 mikami wosu Mount Tabasami 

多婆佐美夜麻乃 tabasami yama no that rules from above— 

阿遅加気尓 adikake ni alas, I stood there 

比止乃麻乎之志 pito no mawosisi in the shade of the aji tree, 

和何於保支美波母 wa ga opokimi pamo begging our master’s return. 

This phonogram appears on a number of mokkan: 美作国 Misaka Province 
(MK 2262), 佐美万呂 Samimaro (MK 2094), 山口伊美吉 YAMAGUTI Imiki 
(MK 57). 

This is the main phonogram to transcribe mi in Kojiki: 伊邪那美神 the 
deity Izanami (KG), 美斗能麻具波比 mitwo no magupapi ‘sexual intercourse’ 
(KG), 美須麻流 misumaru ‘circle of jewels on a string’ (as a necklace or 
bracelet, KG), and 御美豆良 MImidura ‘male hair style’ (KG). It is used 185 
times in the poetry in Kojiki. 

KK 95 

阿具良韋能 agurawi no Young maidens dancing 

加微能美弖母知 kamwi no mite moti to the zither played as if 

比久許登爾 piku koto ni by the hand of a deity 

麻比須流袁美那 mapi suru womina sitting on the high seat. 

登許余爾母加母 tokoyo ni mogamo Ah, to be like this forever. 

In Nihon shoki this graph was popular in annotational notes (20 times), but is 
only used nine times in poetry: 至貴曰尊。自餘曰命。並訓美擧等也 “Deities 
of very high stature are called 尊. All others are labeled 命. Both characters are 
read mikoto” (NSG). 皇産靈、此云美武須毘 “ ‘imperial-productive-spirit’ is 
read mimusupi” (NSG). 

NSK 97 

駄開能 take no Wonderful, flourishing bamboo 

以矩美娜開余嚢開 ikumidake yodake with long joints and leaves— 

謨等陛嗚麼 motopye woba We will make a koto 

莒等儞都倶唎 koto ni tukuri out of the base of it, 

須衞陛嗚麼 suwepye woba and make a flute 

府曳儞都倶唎 puye ni tukuri out of the top of it. 

This is the most popular phonogram to transcribe mi in Man’yōshū, 
appearing 902 times. 


MYS 33 

樂浪乃 SASANAMI no The august deity of 

國都美神乃 KUNI tu miKAMWI no the land of Sasanami 

浦佐備而 URAsabwiTE has become unimportant. 

荒有京 ARETARU MIYAKWO Looking upon the desolate 

見者悲毛 MIREBA KANASI mo metropolis breaks my heart. 

 

瀰 


OJ: mi OC: *meʔ 

LH: mieʔ EMC: mjieʔ LMC: mbji GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: NA SV: mễ, ri SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and although it only appears in Nihon 
shoki, it should transcribe bi, so I place it in the LJS. This is the most popular 
graph used to transcribe mi in Shoki, used 109 times in poetry, and 10 times in 
annotational notes: 蹢跙、此云布瀰那羅須 “ ‘trample’ is read puminarasu” 
(NSG). 

NSK 15 

許能瀰枳破 kono miki pa This divine sake 

和餓瀰枳那羅孺 wa ga miki narazu is not for myself. 

椰磨等那殊 yamato nasu It was prepared by 

於朋望能農之能 opomononusi no the builder of Yamato, 

介瀰之瀰枳 kamisi miki Ōmononushi. 

伊句臂佐 ikupisa Prosper forever, 

伊句臂佐 ikupisa forever. 

 

民 


OJ: mi OC: *min 

LH: min EMC: mjien GO: min KN: bin 

NOM: dân SV: dân SK: min 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 883 

於登爾吉岐 oto ni kiki I have heard the rumors 

目爾波伊麻太見受 ME nipa imada MIzu but have not seen it yet— 

佐容比賣我 saywo pimye ga Mount ‘I-will-wait-for-you,’ 

必禮布理伎等敷 pire puriki topu Mount Matsura where 

吉民萬通良楊満 kimi matura yama Princess Sayo waved her scarf. 

 

弭 


OJ: mi OC: *meʔ 

LH: mieʔ EMC: mjieʔ LMC mbji GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: nhẹ SV: mễ, nhị SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It only appears in Nihon shoki, and then 
only once in a song from the Age of the Gods record. This graph is used a 
number of times to transcribe bi. Consider the song: 

NSK 6 

阿軻娜磨廼 akadama no The radiant globe 

比訶利播阿利登 pikari pa ari to is wonderfully brilliant, 


比鄧播伊珮耐 pito pa ipyedo so people may say, 

企弭我譽贈比志 kimi ga yosopisi but I have now realized 

多輔妬勾阿利計利 taputwoku arikyeri your brilliance is the finest. 

It is not improbable that 企弭 represents kibi, and one could say this is a 
variant of kimi ‘lord,’ showing the m ~ b alternation that is well known in 
Japanese, but there is no other evidence that a word kibi ever existed. Following 
Occam’s Razor I posit that this graph is used for its EMC reading here. This 
again provides evidence that the text of Nihon shoki is somewhat heterogeneous. 

 

寐 


OJ: mi OC: *mis 

LH: mis EMC: mih LMC mbji GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: mị SV: mị SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only in Nihon shoki once. It 
is used more frequently in Nihon shoki to transcribe bi. 

NSK 83 

伊儺武斯盧 inamusiro The willow growing along 

呵簸泝比野儺擬 kapaswopi yanagwi the banks of the river bends 

寐逗喩凱麼 midu yukeba with the flow of the water. 

儺弭企於己陀智 nabiki okotati Fluttering or standing tall 

曾能泥播宇世儒 sono ne pa usezu the roots remain unchanged. 

 

湄 


OJ: mi OC: *mui 

LH: mɨ EMC: mji KN: mbi GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: mưa SV: mi SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS and appears only once in Nihon shoki in 
the following song: 

NSK 35 

伊奘阿藝 iza agi Behold, my son. 

怒珥比蘆菟湄珥 nwo ni piru tumi ni To the moor, garlic to pick, 

比蘆菟瀰珥 piru tumi ni gathering we will go. 

和餓喩區瀰智珥 wa ga yuku miti ni On the way there, we will find 

伽遇破志 kagupasi the most splendid scent 

波那多智麼那 pana tatibana of the orange in bloom. 

 

三 


OJ: mi OC: *sə̂ m 

LH: sam, səm EMC: sâm GO: samu KN: san 

NOM: tam SV: tam SK: sam 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ mi ‘three.’ This kungana is very old 
appearing in the Jōgūki fragment, to transcribe 三国 MIKUNI. It is possible that 
this is a later interpolated usage, but for the time being I postulate that it dates 
back to the EJS. Kojiki contains examples of 三野国 Province of MINWO (KG). 
Book 10 of Kujiki, ‘Kokuzō Hongi’ records 三野前国 ‘Upper MINWO’ and 三 
野後国 ‘Lower MINWO’ Provinces. 

There are many usages of this kungana to transcribe mi in the Taihō censuses 


of 702: 三嶋 MISIMA, 三山 MIYAMA, 三野賣 MINWOmye, 三委賣 
MIwimye, and 三川 MIKAPA. 

There are also a number of examples of this usage in Nihon shoki: 三諸山 
MIMORO YAMA (NSG), 三宅吉士 MIYAKE Kisi (NSG), and 三輪 MIWA 
(NSG). This usage is also very popular in Man’yōshū: 三輪乃山 MIWA no 
YAMA ‘Mount Miwa’ (MYS 17), 高三香裳 TAKAMI KAMO ‘because of its 
height’…(MYS 44), and 三雪落 MIYUKI PURU ‘the august snow falls’… (MYS 
45). 

 

御 


OJ: mi OC: *ŋah 

LH: ŋɨah EMC: ŋjwoʔ GO: go KN: gyo 

NOM: ngự, ngợ SV: ngự SK: a, e 

Usage / History: 

This kungana causes ther reader to make the association with OJ mi 
‘honorific prefix,’ which must have been well known to readers of Japanese 
hybrid texts, as the graph 御 originally meant ‘preside over,’ govern’ or even 
‘drive a chariot,’ but has no connotation in Chinese similar to an honorific prefix. 
The earliest datable examples appear in the Mino Census of 702: 御野国 
MINWO Province, 御川 MIKAPA, 御由 支 賣 MIyukimye, 乎御佐 加 
WoMIsaka, and 御蘇手賣 MIswoDEmye. 

While there are a variety of examples in Kojiki and Nihon shoki, all examples 
I have found are better analyzed as logograms. 

There are 17 examples of this kungana in Man’yōshū: 大伴乃御津乃濱松 
OPOTOMO no MITU no PAMAMATU ‘the pines on the beach of Mitsu in Ōtomo 
(are waiting)… (MYS 63); 三吉野之御金高爾 MIYOSINWO NO / MIKANE NO 
TAKE ni ‘on the peak of Mikane in Miyoshino…’ (MYS 3293). 

 

見 


OJ: mi OC: *kêns 

LH: kenh EMC: kienh GO: kemu KN: ken 

NOM: kiến SV: kiến SK: kyen 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ mi, the infinitive of the verb miru ‘see’ as 見 
‘see.’ This usage appears in the Mino Census of 702: 方見 KATAMI, 奈見賣 
NaMImye, and 伎波見 KipaMI. This usage also appears in Kojiki, in examples 
like 大綿津見神 the deity OPOWATATUMI (all deities with the suffix tumi are 
written 津見, KG), 日子穂穂手見命 PIKWO POPODEMI [NO] MIKOTO (KG), 
and 菅原之伏見岡 the hill SUGAPARA NO PUSIMI (KG). Nihon shoki has a 
few of the same kind of usages as Kojiki: 彦火火出見 PIKWO POPODEMI 
(NSG). There are other interesting examples like 見野尊 MINWO [NO] 
MIKOTO (NSG), 月夜見尊 TUKWI YWOMI [NO] MIKOTO (NSG), and 見川 
MIKAPA (NSG). 

This kungana appears often in Man’yōshū, but as Ōno (1977:632) points out, 
the majority of the usages are found in toponyms: 見吉野 MIYOSINWO (MYS 
74, 313, 315, 353), and 稲見 INAMI (MYS 303, 938, 1772). 

 


水 


OJ: mi OC: *lhuiʔ 

LH: tśuiʔ or śuiʔ EMC: świʔ GO: suwi KN: sui 

NOM: thủy SV: thuỷ SK: swu 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ mi of midu ‘water.’ It is a point of 
some debate about whether midu is actually bimoraic, or is mi plus something. 
This supposition is strengthened by the word mina found in various forms in 
poetry: minasigapa ‘river without water,’ minasoko ‘bottom of the river (water).’ 
Therefore, it would appear that mi may have been an old word for ‘water,’ which 
would explain why 水 alone is associated with mi. 

Kojiki has only a few examples of this usage, but 水戸 MITWO (KG) and 
水分 MIKUMARI ‘distribution of water’ are perhaps the best known (KG). 
This graph appears in Nihon shoki in names like 水間城王 King MIMAKWI 
(NSG), 水沼県 MINUMA [NO] AGATA ‘District of Minuma’ (NSG), and 水派 
宮 the palace of MIMATA (NSG). There are 12 examples of this kungana in 
Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1130 

神左振 KAMUsaBURU How very sad I am 

磐根己凝敷 IPANE kogoSIKI looking at Mount Mikumari 

三芳野之 MIYOSINWO NO in Miyoshino with its 

水分山乎 MIKUMARI YAMA wo steep and rugged boulders 

見者悲毛 MIREBA KANASI mo that seem god-like. 

 

參 


OJ: mi OC: *tshə̂ m < *k-sə̂ m 

LH: tshəm EMC: tshậm GO: samu KN: san 

NOM: tham, sâm SV: tham SK: sam, cham, som, chom 

Usage / History: 

This kungana is related to the association of 三 mi ‘three.’ In legal 
documents the easily altered graph 三 was written with the more difficult graph 
參 ‘three.’ This usage is almost solely confined to representing the toponym: 參 
河国 province of MIKAPA. A few other examples found in the census records 
of Nara include 參歳賣 MITOSImye. The writing 參河 MIKAPA appears in 
Nihon shoki, Man’yōshū, and Shoku Nihongi. Shoku Nihongi transcribes this as 
參河, but there is one instance of 參川 (726.8.30). 

 

視 


OJ: mi OC: *ɡiʔ 

LH: ɡiʔ, ɡih EMC: źiʔ, źih GO: zi KN: si 

NOM: thị SV: thị SK: si 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ mi, the infinitive of miru ‘see,’ as 
means 視 ‘look at.’ This usage only appears in Man’yōshū, and then only once. 

MYS 1761 

秋芽子之 AKIPAGWI NO Trying to spend the night with 

妻巻六跡 TUMA WO MAKAMU TO the autumn bush clover spouse, 

朝月夜 ASADUKUYWO regretting the coming dawn 

明巻鴦視 AKEMAKU WOSIMI with the moonlit morning— 

足日木乃 ASIPIKWI no I am calling out 


山響令動 YAMABIKWO TOYOME causing an echo in 

喚立鳴毛 YWOBITATE NAKU mo the mountains of cramped legs. 

 

敏 


OJ: minu OC: *mə̂ ʔ 

LH: mɨənʔ EMC: mj(w)en GO: min KN: bin 

NOM: mẫn, mẩn SV: mẫn SK: min 

Usage / History: 

This interesting phonogrammatic usage belongs to the LJS, and is based on 
the Sino-Japanese reading of minu, which later became min in Japanese. This 
usage is only found in Man’yōshū, and then only to write the place name 
Minume: 敏馬乎過 minumye wo SUGWITE ‘passing by Minume…’ (MYS 250). 

 

母 


OJ: mo OC: *məʔ 

LH: məʔ EMC: məu GO: mo, mu KN: bou 

NOM: mẫu SV: mẫu SK: mwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, and appears in Wei zhi once in the 
following title: 卑奴母離 *pe-nɔ-mə-rai. There is much debate about whether 
this phonogram had a rounded or unrounded nucleus, but as the SV and Nom 
data show, the nucleus was unrounded from the Later Han period until perhaps 
after the Sui period. 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki in materials likely quoted from 
Paekche sources: in the Jingū record we find the name of an individual, 富羅母 
智 Poramoti; in the record of Keitai we have a Paekche individual called 久禮 
斯己母 Kure Sikomo; in the record of Tenji we see a Paekche man called 許率 
母 Kosotumo. 

This phonogram is also found in the earliest extant material in Japan. In the 
Jōgūki fragment we find the name 母母思己麻和加中比彌 Momosiko 
Mawaka NAKA Pimye. This phonogram appears 25 times in the liturgies: 汁爾母 
穎爾母称辞竟奉牟 SIRU nimo KABI nimo TATAPEGOTO WOPEMATURAmu “We 
will present the wine too, and the rice also, after exhausting the words of 
praise…” (NT 1). This phonogram appears on a variety of mokkan: 玉尓有皮手 
尓麻伎母知而伊□・□□皮伊加尓加 TAMA ni ARU pa TE ni makimotiTE 
iX…XX pa ikani ka… “As for what is on the jewels, wrap them around your 
wrist…why…?” (MKK 10:90). 

Kojiki is an important source, as the record consistently used 母 to 
transcribe mo: 玉緒母由良迩取由良迦志而 TAMA [NO] WO moyura ni 
TORIyurakasiTE ‘He took the string of jewels in his hand, making a jingling 
sound...’ (KG). In a scene in Nihon shoki where Susanoo takes off a string of 
jewels he has wrapped in the left bun of his tied up hair the text says 瓊響瑲瑲 
‘the sound of the jewels jingling.’ The compiler then adds this annotational note: 
瑲瑲乎、此云奴儺等母母由羅爾 “ ‘jewels jingling’ is read nu na tomo 
moyura ni” (NSG), attesting to this reading. 

KK 83 

阿麻陀牟 amadamu Flying in the heavens 

加流乃袁登賣 karu no wotomye the maiden of Karu— 

志多多爾母 sitata nimo come close to me, 


余理泥弖登富禮 yorinete topore and spend the night tightly, 

加流袁登賣杼母 karu no wotomyedomo you maidens of Karu. 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, eight times in the annotational 
notes, and 37 times in the poetry, transcribing mo without error: 湌泉之竃、此 
云譽母都俳遇比 “ ‘hearth of the underworld’ is read yomotupegupi” (NSG), 泉 
津平坂、此云余母都比羅佐可 “ ‘the flat hill of Yomi’ is read yomotu pirasaka” 
(NSG). These two usages are important, because Kojiki does not have a phonetic 
rendering for this. Rather, it has 黄泉軍 ‘the army of Yomi’ glossed as yomotu 
ikusa. However, it is believed that Yomi is actually yomwi or phonetically 
/yəməi/, thus the boundform would naturally be yomo-, which is supported by 
these two representations as found in Nihon shoki. 

NSK 34 

知麼能 tiba no Looking out over 

伽豆怒塢彌例麼 kadunwo wo mireba the verdant plain of Kazu, 

茂々智儾蘆 momotidaru I behold before me 

夜珥波母彌喩 yanipa mo miyu an abundance of villages— 

區珥能朋母彌喩 kuni no po mo miyu I also see a land of excellence. 

Book 5 of Man’yōshū also makes a concerted effort to distinguish between 
mwo and mo. My own data (2002:360) show that of 45 occurrences with verbs or 
nouns that should contain mwo, 43 are written etymologically, for 95% accuracy. 
Mo on the other hand is slightly less, with 86% accuracy (110:128). Examples 
include words like 母乃 mono ‘thing’ (MYS 793), 意母保由 omopoyu ‘come 
to mind’ (MYS 802), 母等 moto ‘base, origin’ (MYS 802), 銀母金母玉母 
SIROGANE mo KUGANE mo TAMA mo ‘Even silver, gold, or jewels...’ (MYS 803). 

 

文 


OJ: mo OC: *mən 

LH: mun EMC: mjwən GO: momu KN: bun 

NOM: văn SV: văn SK: mwun 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Wi-cwu Silla stele 
(525) in an apparent fragment of a name 文王 King Mon. Also on the Silla 
Namsan stele (591) there are names such as 文知阿尺城 *mon-ti-a-tśhiak 
fortress, 文尺竹生 *mon-tśhiak-tuk-sɛŋ, and 文尺美吹利 *mon-tśhiak-mɨʔtśhuai-
li. It also appears in the 10th month of Kinmei where an individual from 
Paekche is called 馬次文, glossed ma-si-mon. In an entry in the following year, 
the same individual is called 馬進文, glossed ma-sin-mon. 

This phonogram is rarely used in extant Japanese texts. In general the graph 
文 transcribed aya, apparently a place name on the continent from which a group 
of skilled artisians originated. This phonogram does appear in Izumo fudoki: 母理 
郷、本字文理 “The village of Mori (母理) was originally written Mori (文理).” 

The phonogram 文 appears in Man’yōshū a total of 60 times. 

MYS 1824 

冬隠 PUYUGOMORI Hidden within winter— 

春去来之 PARU SARI KUREBA as spring has come 

足比木乃 ASIbiKWI no the bush warbler calls out in 

山二文野二文 YAMA nimo NWO nimo the mountains of cramped legs, 

鴬鳴裳 UGUPISU NAKU MO and also in the fields. 


梅 


OJ: mo OC: *mê or *mêʔ 

LH: mə EMC: mwậi GO: mai KN: bai 

NOM: mai SV: mai SK: moy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. Though this usage only appears in 
Nihon shoki, because it is used to transcribe mo, it hints at the fact that the 
compiler knew this graph had an earlier reading of mə. This is quite striking, 
because the sole example of this to transcribe mo appears in the Jinmu record of 
Shoki, where 梅 is used five times to transcribe mey. The sole example appears 
in the annotational notes: 坂下、此云瑳伽梅苔 “ ‘bottom of the hill’ is read 
sakamoto” (NSG). 

 

茂 


OJ: mo OC: *muh 

LH: muh EMC: məuh GO: mu KN: bou 

NOM: mậu SV: mậu SK: mwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. Coblin posits məu in the Qieyun System, 
and then reconstructs ONWC *mou. The SV and Nom data show that an 
unrounded nucleus persisted longer in some areas. As noted in Bentley (2002), I 
believe that Nihon shoki used this graph to transcribe mo. In the Taihō Census we 
find names with this graph, such as 志茂 Simo, 加茂 Kamo, but the 
etymology of these names is unclear. This phonogram appears a number of times 
on mokkan: 伊豆国賀茂郡 Idu Province Kamo District (MK 342). 

This phonogram appears in Nihon shoki in a variety of words, and the 
following chart aligns these with the phonogram 母 and 望, also representing mo. 

 

Word With 母 With 茂 With 望 

moto ‘base’ — 茂等 望苔 

tomo ‘companion’ 等母 等茂 — 

moti ‘holding’ 母知 茂知 — 

mo ‘particle’ 母 茂 望 

koromo ‘robe’ 莒呂母 — 虚呂望 

mono ‘thing’ 母能 茂能 望能 

(o)mop- ‘think’ — 茂布 望閉耐 

 — 茂赴 於望比 

The accuracy here is striking. This phonogram also appears in Izumo fudoki, 
but is always limited to kamo. There are only two instances of 茂 as a 
phonogram in Man’yōshū, both representing the particle mo: 阿可思通良久茂 
akasituraku mo ‘ah, the night having ended’ (MYS 485), 紀爾茂安理等毛 kwi 
nimo aritomo ‘even though it is wood (and cannot speak)’ (MYS 812). 

 

望 


OJ: mo OC: *maŋ 

LH: muaŋ EMC: mjwaŋ GO: mau KN: bau 

NOM: vọng SV: vọng SK: mang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Nihon shoki, once in the 
annotational notes, and 15 times in the poetry: 物實、此云望能志呂 “ ‘replica,’ 


this is read monosiro” (NSG). In the following poem this graph appears seven 
times. 

NSK 43 

智破揶臂等 tipaya pito Very powerful 

于旎能和多利珥 udi no watari ni those catalpa trees 

和多利涅珥 wataride ni standing by the bank 

多氐屢 tateru of the ferry. 

阿豆瑳由瀰摩由瀰 adusayumi mayumi To make a true catalpa bow, 

伊枳羅牟苔 ikiramu to I thought in my heart, 

虚々呂破望閉耐 kokoro pa mopedo to cut down a catalpa tree. 

伊斗羅牟苔 itworamu to I thought in my heart 

虚々呂破望閉耐 kokoro pa mopedo to hold one of those trees. 

望苔幣破 motopye pa I thought of you 

枳瀰烏於望臂涅 kimi wo omopide at the trunk of the tree. 

須慧幣破 suwepye pa I remembered you 

伊暮烏於望比涅 imo wo omopide when I looked up at the crown. 

伊羅那鷄區 iranakyeku I felt such sorrow 

曾虚珥於望比 soko ni omopi thinking of you there. 

伽那志鷄區 kanasikyeku I felt such sadness 

虚々珥於望臂 koko ni omopi thinking about you here. 

伊枳羅儒層區屢 ikirazu so kuru I left without cutting down 

阿豆瑳由瀰摩由瀰 adusayumi mayumi the tree for the catalpa bow. 

The phonogram 望 ‘expect, hope’ is used here in a dual role, once for its 
phonetic value, and also for it semantic. The graph also imparts a sense of 
expectation with its underlying semantic value. 

 

暮 


OJ: mo OC: *mâkh 

LH: mah EMC: muoh GO: mo KN: bo 

NOM: mộ, mô SV: mộ SK: mwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, but only appears in Nihon shoki, nine 
times in poems. 

NSK 24 

阿佐志毛能 asasimwo no The morning frost melts— 

瀰概能佐烏麼志 mike no sawobasi courtiers cross over 

魔弊菟耆瀰 mapyetu kimi the little tree bridge 

伊和哆羅秀暮 iwatarasu mo to and fro from work; 

瀰開能佐烏麼志 mike no sawobasi over the little tree bridge. 

慕 


OJ: mo OC: *mâkh 

LH: mah EMC: muoh GO: mo KN: bo 

NOM: NA SV: mộ SK: mwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in Nihon shoki in three 
annotational notes, and 13 times in poetry: 言於母亦兄、於吾亦兄、此云於慕 
尼慕是、阿例尼慕是 “ ‘He was a son to my mother and a husband to me’ is omo 
nimo se, are nimo se” (NSG). 


NSK 94 

伊須能箇瀰 isu no kami We passed through 

賦屢嗚須擬底 puru wo sugwite Furu of Isunokami. 

擧慕摩矩羅 komo makura We passed by the valley 

柁箇播志須擬 takapasi sugwi of Takahashi of straw pillows. 

慕能娑播儞 monosapa ni We walked through 

於裒野該須擬 opoyake sugwi Ōyake where many things are. 

播屢比 parupi We went by Kasuga, 

箇須我嗚須擬 kasuga wo sugwi written ‘spring-day.’ 

逗摩御慕屢 tumagomoru We traveled through 

嗚佐裒嗚須擬 wosapo wo sugwi Osaho, the hidden wife. 

拕摩該儞播 tamake nipa On the jeweled ritual plate 

伊比佐倍母理 ipi sape mori we piled rice high. 

拕摩慕比儞 tamamopi ni The jeweled ritual cup 

瀰逗佐倍母理 midu sape mori we filled with water. 

儺岐曾裒遲喩倶謀 nakisopoti yuku mo On goes the procession, 

柯㝵比謎阿婆例 kage pimye apare weeping and wet; poor 

 Kagehime. 

 

莽 


OJ: mo OC: *mâʔ 

LH: mɑʔ EMC: muoh GO: mau KN: bau 

NOM: mãng, mảng SV: mãng SK: mang, mwo, mwu 

Usage / History: 

There is Sino-Xenic evidence that this phonogram actually has two readings. 
SK preserves one reading with /a/ and another with /o/. Miyake (1999:800, 801) 
argues for two different EMC readings for this graph. Schuessler (2009:89) 
reconstructs two different forms, with different nuclei. OJ ma came from EMC 
maŋ, while OJ mo came from EMC muoh. This phonogram appears in Shoki for 
both OJ ma and mo. I have examined the text of Nihon shoki, and the phonogram 
莽 for ma is only found in Books 3, 11, and 17, while 莽 for mo appears in 
Books 5 and 7. Thus, there is no overlap. I conclude that different scribes have 
relied on different orthographic traditions for this phonogram. 

I place this phonogram in the LJS. This phonogram is only used once in the 
annotational notes, and twice in the poetry of Shoki: 神籬、此云比莽呂岐 “a 
sacred grove on a mountain for divine protection’ is read pimorogi” (NSG). 

NSK 22 

夜摩苔波 yamato pa Yamato is 

區珥能摩倍邏摩 kuni no maporama the most prosperous— 

多々儺豆久 tatanaduku a land ringed by 

阿烏伽枳 awokaki mountains arrayed 

夜摩許莽例屢 yama komoreru as a green, rolling fence. 

夜摩苔之于屢破試 yamato no urupasi Yes, Yamato is beautiful. 

 

謀 


OJ: mo OC: *mə 

LH: muə > mu EMC: mjəu GO: mu KN: bou 

NOM: mưu SV: mưu SK: mwo, mwu 


Usage / History: 

It is difficult to know where to place this phonogram, as a LJS placement 
would assume it transcribes mu, while CBS assumes bo, but this graph actually 
transcribes mo, which appears to be a vestige of OC. For the time being I believe 
this belongs to the LJS. 

It appears in Nihon shoki, twice in annotational notes, and 16 times in poetry: 
手掌摎亮、此云陀那則擧謀耶羅々儞 “ ‘clapping of hands’ is to be read 
tabasoko mo yarara ni” (NSG). 

NSK 85 

阿佐膩簸囉 asadipara Through the rocky path of 

嗚贈禰嗚須擬 wosone wo sugwi the mountains and over 

謨謀逗頴甫 momodutapu Asaji Plain comes a distant, 

奴底喩羅倶慕與 nute yuraku mo yo continuous jingle of a bell. 

於岐毎倶羅之慕 okime kurasi mo It seems Okime has arrived. 

 

墓 


OJ: mo OC: *mâkh 

LH: mah EMC: muoh GO: mo KN: bo 

NOM: mộ, mồ SV: mộ SK: mwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS and appears once in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 33 

許能彌企塢 kono miki wo Did the person who 

伽彌鷄武比等破 kamikyemu pito pa brewed this auspicious wine 

曾能菟豆彌 sono tudumi rest his resounding drum 

于輸珥多氐々 usu ni tatete like a grinding mortar, 

于多比菟々 utapitutu and brew this wine 

伽彌鷄梅伽墓 kamikyeme kamo while he sang a song? 

許能彌企能 kono miki no It is strange 

阿椰珥 aya ni how very 

于多娜濃芝 utadanwosi delightful this wine is. 

作沙 sa sa Drink! Drink! 

 

悶 


OJ: mo OC: *mə̂ n 

LH: mən EMC: mwən GO: momu KN: bon 

NOM: muốn, mụn SV: muộn SK: mwun 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears once in Nihon shoki, in the 
record of Jinmu, in a place name: 母木邑。今云飫悶廼奇訛也 “Omoki 
‘mother-tree village’; what we currently say as omonokwi is a corruption of this” 
(NSG). 

 

聞 


OJ: mo OC: *mən 

LH: mun EMC: mjwən GO: momu KN: bun 

NOM: văn SV: vắn SK: mwun 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. Like the graph 文, the final nasal was 
ignored. This graph appears in Izumo fudoki: 恎聞埼 Simo SAKI ‘Simo Cape.’ 


This phonogram is also used 177 times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 44 

吾妹子乎 WAGIMWOKWO wo Mount Izami which I invited 

去来見乃山乎 IZAMI no YAMA wo my beloved to go see— 

高三香裳 TAKAMI KAMO is it because it is so high 

日本能不所見 YAMATO no MIYENU that I cannot see Yamato? 

國遠見可聞 KUNI TOPOMI kamo Or is is because it is so far? 

 

忘 


OJ: mo OC: *maŋ 

LH: muaŋ EMC: mjwaŋ GO: mau KN: bau 

NOM: vong SV: vong SK: mang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only in Man’yōshū, and 
only appears three times. 

MYS 865 

伎弥乎麻都 kimi wo matu Are the young maidens 

麻都良乃于良能 matura no ura no who pine for their lord at 

越等賣良波 wotomyera pa Pine Bay, Matsura, 

等己与能久尓能 tokoyo no kuni no young women divers 

阿麻越等賣可忘 ama wotomye kamo of the eternal land? 

 

蒙 


OJ: mo OC: *môŋ 

LH: moŋ EMC: muŋ GO: mou KN: bou 

NOM: mong, mỏng SV: mông SK: mwong 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in Man’yōshū five times. 

MYS 977 

直超乃 TADA KWOYE no Surely it was here that 

此徑尓弖師 KONO MITI nitesi they named this ‘the sea of 

押照哉 OSITERU YA Naniwa where the sun shines 

難波乃海跡 nanipa no UMI TO broadly’ because this road 

名附家良思蒙 NADUkyerasi mo passes straight through. 

 

門 


OJ: mo OC: *mên 

LH: mən EMC: mwən GO: momu KN:bon 

NOM: mon, môn SV: môn SK: mwun 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only in Man’yōshū. This 
graph is very prevalent in the anthology, but primarily to transcribe kadwo ‘gate’ 
or two ‘door.’ There is actually only one example in Man’yōshū where 門 is 
used as a phonogram, noted below: 

MYS 1421 

春山之 PARU YAMA NO How delightful 

開乃乎為里尓 SAKI no wo wori ni to see the white cord of 

春菜採 PARUNA TUMU my beloved as she picks 

妹之白紐 IMWO GA SIRAPIMO spring herbs on the spring hills 

見九四与四門 MIRAku si yosi mo that are colored with blossoms. 


問 


OJ: mo OC: *məns 

LH: munh EMC: mjwənh GO: momu KN: bun 

NOM: vắn, vặn, vấn SV: vấn SK: mwun 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in Man’yōshū twice: 

MYS 36 

此山乃 KONO YAMA no How I never tire of 

弥高思良珠 IYA TAKAsirasu gazing at the capital of 

水激 MINA SOSOKU waterfalls of crashing waters; 

瀧之宮子波 TAKI NO MIYAKWO pa like this mountain’s great height 

見礼跡不飽可問 MIreDO AKANU kamo it governs far and wide. 

 

勿 


OJ: mo OC: *mət 

LH: mut EMC: mjwət GO: moti KN: butu 

NOM: vất SV: vật SK: mwul 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears five times in Man’yōshū. 
This phonogram is most often used in its Chinese function as a strong negative 
imperative, thus becoming na or naku ni ‘do not do’ in the anthology. 

MYS 807 

宇豆都仁波 ututu nipa There is no way 

安布余志勿奈子 apu yosi mo nasi for us to meet in reality. 

奴婆多麻能 nubatama no See me in your 

用流能伊昧仁越 yworu no ime ni wo dreams at night, 

都伎提美延許曽 tugite miye koso black as ink. 

 

畝 


OJ: mo OC: *mə̂ ʔ~*môʔ 

LH: məʔ~moʔ EMC: məuʔ GO: mo KN: bou 

NOM: mẫu, mẩu SV: mẫu SK: mwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears but once in the ancient 
Japanese corpus, found in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 18 

三輪山乎 MIWA YAMA wo Will you hide Mount Miwa 

然毛隠賀 SIKA mo KAKUSU ka in such a manner? 

雲谷裳 KUMWO DANI MO How I wish the clouds 

情有南畝 KOKORO ARAnamo would show some pity. 

可苦佐布倍思哉 kakusapu besi ya Should it really be hidden? 

 

物 


OJ: mo, moti, moto OC: *mət 

LH: mut EMC: mjwət GO: moti KN: butu 

NOM: vắt, vật SV: vật SK: mwul 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It was used to transcribe both mo and 
moti. In the Yamashiro Census of 726 the name 佐比物 Sapimoti appears. 
Another name preserved in Nara era documents is 福物 Pukumoti. 


In the second year of Tenpyō Jingo there is a place name 物理 Motorowi 
recorded in Shoku Nihongi (766.5.23). 

In Man’yōshū this phonogram is used 42 times to transcribe mo, but notice 
that of these over half (23) use the graph as both a phonogram and a logogram to 
represent the word mono ‘thing’: 物能 mono or 物乃 mono. 

MYS 499 

百重二物 MWOMWOPYE nimo Is it because I think 

来及毳常 KISIKANU KAMO TO I want you to come to me 

念鴨 OMOPE KAMO one hundred times over? 

公之使乃 KIMI GA TUKAPI no I never do weary of 

雖見不飽有武 MIREDO AKAZARAmu seeing your messenger. 

 

裳 


OJ: mo OC: *djaŋ 

LH: dźaŋ EMC: źjaŋ GO: ziyau KN: siyau 

NOM: NA SV: thường SK: syang 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ mo ‘skirt.’ This usage appears once 
in Kojiki: 裳伏岡 MOPUSI Hill (KG). This usage appears twice in Nihon shoki: 
丹裳 NIMO ‘plain of Nimo’ (NSG), and 田裳見宿禰 TAMOMI Sukune 
(NSG). Interestingly this graph also appears in the imperial edicts: 裳咋足嶋 
MOKUPI TARUSIMA (SM 53), a person who led a rebellion against the court. 

This usage is very popular in Man’yōshū, used 158 times. 

MYS 18 

三輪山乎 MIWA YAMA wo Will you hide Mount Miwa 

然毛隠賀 SIKA mo KAKUSU ka in such a manner? 

雲谷裳 KUMWO DANI MO How I wish the clouds 

情有南畝 KOKORO ARAnamo would show some pity. 

可苦佐布倍思哉 kakusapu besi ya Should it really be hidden? 

 

藻 


OJ: mo OC: *tsâuʔ 

LH: tsauʔ EMC: tsâuʔ GO: sau KN: sau 

NOM: tảo SV: tảo SK: cwo 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ mo ‘seaweed, algae.’ This usage 
appears once in the Hitachi Fudoki: 藻島 MO SIMA ‘Mo Island,’ but it should 
be noted that this might actually be ME SIMA ‘Me Island,’ as 藻 has two 
readings, mo and me. 

This usage is quite popular in Man’yōshū, appearing 23 times, but most 
examples are 玉藻 TAMAMO ‘gem weed.’ A simple example is below. 

MYS 1036 

關無者 SEKI NAKU PA If there were no barriers 

還尓谷藻 KAPYERI ni DANI MO then I would return home 

打行而 UTI YUKITE for just a while— 

妹之手枕 IMWO GA TAMAKURA wanting to sleep wrapped 

巻手宿益乎 MAKITE NEMASI wo in the arms of my beloved. 

 


喪 


OJ: mo OC: *sâŋ 

LH: saŋ EMC: sâŋ GO: sau KN: sau 

NOM: tang, táng SV: tang, táng SK: sang 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ mo ‘mourning.’ This usage appears once in 
Kojiki: 喪山 MO YAMA ‘Mount Mo’ (KG). This usage also appears four times in 
Man’yōshū. 

MYS 450 

去左尓波 YUKU sa nipa When we went 

二吾見之 PUTA WA GA MIsi and the two of us saw 

此埼乎 KONO SAKI wo this cape (of Minume)— 

獨過者 PITORI SUGUREBA how depressing 

情悲喪 KOKOROGANASI MO to pass by here alone. 

The use of 喪 at the end of this poem deepens the visual feelings of grief the 
poet is expressing. 

 

哭 


OJ: mo OC: *khôk 

LH: khok EMC: khuk GO: koku KN: koku 

NOM: khóc SV: khốc SK: kwok 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ mo ‘mourning,’ based on 哭 ‘lament.’ This 
usage only appears three times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1603 

頃者之 KONO KORO NO Lately when you listen 

朝開尓聞者 ASAKE ni KIKEBA at the break of dawn 

足日木箆 ASIPIKWI NO great bucks call for their mates 

山呼令響 YAMA YWOBI TOYOMYE making the mountains, 

狭尾壮鹿鳴哭 SAWOSIKA NAKU MO which tire the legs, resound. 

 

裙 


OJ: mo OC: *ɡwən 

LH: ɡun EMC: ɡjwən GO: gun KN: kun 

NOM: quần SV: quần SK: kwun 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ mo ‘skirt.’ This usage only appears 
once in Nihon shoki, in the record of Kinmei: 越人江渟臣裙代 ‘Enu [NO] OMI 
MOSIRO, a man from KWOSI….’ 

 

木 


OJ: moko, mo OC: *môk 

LH: mok EMC: muk GO: moku KN: boku 

NOM: mộc, mọc, mốc SV: mộc SK: mwok 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Silla Mwu-swyul-wo 
stele (578) in what appears to be a name: 伊叱木利 ʔI-tsit Mok-li. This graph is 
also used in Nihon shoki in the record of Jingū with a Paekche man named 木羅 
斤資 Mok-la Konsi. In the 25th year of Ōjin we see a Paekche minister named 
木滿致 Mok Manti, but it is clear that this is likely Mok-la Manti (木劦滿致) 


according to Samguk sagi. In the reign of Keitai we see another Paekche man 
named 木刕不麻甲背 Mok-la Puma Kapu. 

This usage seems to live on in tiny vestiges in Man’yōshū. Consider the 
following poem where the final velar of 木 seems to echo in the next velarinitial 
graph. 

MYS 185 

水傳 MINATUTAPU The azaleas among the boulders 

礒乃浦廻乃 ISWO no URAMWI no where the water snakes 

石上乍自 IPA TUTUzi around the rocks of the lake 

木丘開道乎 moku SAKU MITI wo are in full bloom by the path— 

又将見鴨 MATA MO MIMU KAMO will I ever see these again? 

 

没 


OJ: moto OC: *mə̂ t 

LH: muət EMC: mwət GO: moti KN: botu 

NOM: một SV: một SK: mwol 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Silla Namsan stele (ca. 
591) in the following name: 阿良没奈 *a-ra-muət-na. It also appears in the 
fragment of a name on the Hamcwu Silla hunting stele (568): 喙部没兮次 
*hyas-bu muət-gɛj-tshi. It is also interesting as this graph also appears in Nihon 
shoki, the native section of the record of Gread King (eighth year, first month), 
recording the name of several unknown islands. The one that concerns us is 
written as 没利嶋. The interlinear reading is motori. Shaku Nihongi says nothing, 
but the Heibon manuscript (ca. 1000) of Shiki preserves the reading of 
motorisima (Kuroita 1932:161). 

 

牟 


OJ: mu OC: *mu 

LH: mu EMC: mjəu GO: mu KN: bou 

NOM: mầu, màu,mào SV: mâu, mầu SK: mwo, mwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. This appears in the section of Ma-Han in 
Wei zhi, where polities named 牟水國 *Mu-tśuiʔ domain, 優休牟涿國 *U-xumu-
tɔk domain, 咨離牟廬國 *Tsi-liɑi-mu-liɑ domain, and 牟廬卑離國 *Muliɑi 
-pie-liɑi domain appear. 

This phonogram was also used in the orthographies of all three kingdoms 
(Koguryŏ, Paekche, Silla). The Kwangkaytho stele preserves the names of 
fortress cities such as 牟水城 *Mu-tśuiʔ fortress, 牟盧城 *Mu-liɑ fortress, 
and 古牟婁城 *Kɔ-mu-lio fortress. Also, King Kwangkaytho’s ancestor, the 
founding king of Koguryŏ, was known by the name 鄒牟王 King *Tu-mu. 

This phonogram also appears in Paekche sources quoted in Nihon shoki: 牟 
婁 Murwo, a territory in Mimana, 布那牟羅 (the fortress of) Punamura, 任那 
久斯牟羅 Kusimura of Mimana, 伊斯枳牟羅城 Isikimura Fortress, 久禮牟羅 
城 Kuremura Fortress, and 牟雌枳牟羅 (the fortress of) Musikimura. 

This phonogram appears 23 times in the liturgies: 北方佐渡与里乎知能所 
乎奈牟多知疫鬼之住加登定賜比 KITA [NO] MO[ PA] sadwo yori woti no 
TOKORO wo namutati EKI [NO] ONI NO SUMIka to SADAMETAMApi “From the 
direction of the north, (the deities) have determined that the dwellings of you, the 


demons of pestilence, will be the distant places from Sado Island northward…” 
(NT 16). This phonogram appears on a number of mokkan: 紀伊国牟婁郡牟婁 
Ki Province Murwo District Murwo (village?)… (MK 435), 文伊美吉牟良自 
PUMI Imiki Murazi (MKK 12:10). 

This phonogram is the primary graph used to transcribe mu in Kojiki: 訓生 
云宇牟 “The native reading of the graph 生 ‘give birth’ is umu” (KG); 賜名号 
意富加牟豆美命 ‘He was given the name Opokamutumi [NO] MIKOTO, 伊自牟 
國 Izimu Province (KG). 

KK 87 

岐美賀由岐 kimi ga yuki Many days have passed 

氣那賀久那理奴 kenagaku narinu since you have left. 

夜麻多豆能 yamatadu no And like the elderberry 

牟加閇袁由加牟 mukape wo yukamu I will come to meet you, 

麻都爾波麻多士 matu nipa matazi as I cannot wait anymore. 

This phonogram appears in Nihon shoki, twice in the annotational notes and 
ten times in the poetry: 齊、此云牟吾閉 “ ‘(the name) 齊’ is read mugwope” 
(NSG); 是犬咋山獸名牟士那而殺之 “This dog bit and killed a mountain beast 
called muzina” (NSG). 

NSK 43 

智破揶臂等 tipaya pito Very powerful 

于旎能和多利珥 udi no watari ni those catalpa trees 

和多利涅珥 wataride ni standing by the bank 

多氐屢 tateru of the ferry. 

阿豆瑳由瀰摩由瀰 adusayumi mayumi To make a true catalpa bow, 

伊枳羅牟苔 ikiramu to I thought in my heart, 

虚々呂破望閉耐 kokoro pa mopedo to cut down a catalpa tree. 

伊斗羅牟苔 itworamu to I thought in my heart 

虚々呂破望閉耐 kokoro pa mopedo to hold one of those trees. 

望苔幣破 motopye pa I thought of you 

枳瀰烏於望臂涅 kimi wo omopide at the trunk of the tree. 

須慧幣破 suwepye pa I remembered you 

伊暮烏於望比涅 imo wo omopide when I looked up at the crown. 

伊羅那鷄區 iranakyeku I felt such sorrow 

曾虚珥於望比 soko ni omopi thinking of you there. 

伽那志鷄區 kanasikyeku I felt such sadness 

虚々珥於望臂 koko ni omopi thinking about you here. 

伊枳羅儒層區屢 ikirazu so kuru I left without cutting down 

阿豆瑳由瀰摩由瀰 adusayumi mayumi the tree for the catalpa bow. 

This phonogram is also one of the main graphs to transcribe mu in 
Man’yōshū, appearing 546 times: 

MYS 806 

多都能馬母 tatu no MA mo How I want to obtain 

伊麻勿愛弖之可 ima mo ete sika even a dragon steed right now, 

阿遠尓与志 awo ni yosi in order to return 

奈良乃美夜古尓 nara no miyakwo ni to the Nara capital, 

由吉帝己牟丹米. yukite komu tame which is good in its greenery. 

This phonogram appears in the Bussoku stele poetic sequence. 


BSS 8 

己乃美阿止乎 kono miato wo Seeking and searching 

多豆祢毛止米弖 tatunemotomete this august footprint 

与伎比止乃 yoki pito no to the land where 

伊麻須久尓々波 imasu kuni nipa the righteous person resides; 

和礼毛麻胃弖牟 ware mo mawitemu I would also venture there, 

毛呂毛呂乎爲弖 moromoro wo wite leading the masses. 

 

武 


OJ: mu OC: *maʔ 

LH: muaʔ EMC: mjuʔ GO: mu KN: bu 

NOM: vũ, võ SV: vũ SK: mwu 

Usage / History: 

Dating this phonogram is somewhat problematic. The phonogram 武 
‘military prowess’ is quite popular as a semantogram, and thus may have been 
generally avoided as a phonogram. I tentatively place this phonogram in the PBS. 
It appears in an inscription found on the north wall of the Koryo Cin tomb: 武王 
King Mu, but it is also possible this is simply an epithet: ‘military king.’ Also 
this phonogram appears in Paekche names quoted from Paekche sources by the 
compilers of Nihon shoki: 武寧王 King Munei of Paekche, 施徳馬武 Myemu 
of the eighth rank, and 物部莫奇武連 MONONOBYE Magamu MURAZI. This 
phonogram appears on a number of wooden tablets: □宿祢武恵麻呂 X Sukune 
Muwemaro (unnumbered tablet), 阿波国那賀郡武芸駅 Mugi Relay Station in 
Apa Province, Naga District (MKK 9:13). 

This phonogram is used in Kojiki, but only in two specific cases: 相武國 
Sagamu Province (KG), and what appears to be a peninsular name, 金波鎭漢紀 
武 Komu Patol Kankwi Mu (KG). 

This phonogram is also used by the compilers of Nihon shoki nine times in 
annotational notes and 34 times in song: 皇産靈、此云美武須毘 “ ‘the 
imperial-producing-spirit’ is read mimusupi” (NSG). 

NSK 75 

野麼等能 yamato no On the peaks 

嗚武羅能陀該儞 womura no take ni of the mountains of Yamato, 

之々符須登 sisi pusu to who shall venture forth 

拕例柯 tare ka to stand before 

擧能居登 kono koto the great one and tell him 

飫裒磨陛儞麻嗚須 opomapye ni mawosu where the beast lays waiting? 

飫裒枳瀰簸 opokimi pa The great lord 

賊據嗚枳舸斯題 soko wo kikasite overhears these words, 

柁磨々枳能 tamamaki no takes his jeweled 

阿娯羅儞陀々伺 agura ni tatasi dais and sits upon it. 

施都魔枳能 situmaki no He takes the dais 

阿娯羅儞陀々伺 agura ni tatasi of cloth and sits upon it. 

斯々磨都登 sisi matu to Waiting for the beast. 

倭我伊麻西麼 wa ga imaseba As I sit here 

佐謂麻都登 sawi matu to waiting for the boar, 

倭我陀々西麼 wa ga tataseba as I rise to my feet, 


陀倶符羅爾 takubura ni a horsefly lands 

阿武柯枳都枳 amu kakituki on my arm and bites me. 

曾能阿武嗚 sono amu wo a dragonfly appears 

婀枳豆波野倶譬 akidu paya kupi and devours the horsefly. 

波賦武志謀 papu musi mo Even the crawling insects 

飫裒枳瀰儞麼都羅符 opokimi ni maturapu continue to serve their lord. 

儺我柯陀播 na ga kata pa I shall leave a tribute 

於柯武 okamu for you, 

婀岐豆斯麻野麻登 akitusima yamato Akizushima Yamato. 

This phonogram appears in Man’yōshū roughly 289 times. 

MYS 810 

伊可尓安良武 ika ni aramu When was it, 

日能等伎尓可母 PI no toki ni kamo what day was it? 

許恵之良武 kowe siramu When I made my pillow 

比等能比射乃倍 pito no piza no pe the lap of a person who 

和我麻久良可武 wa ga makurakamu knew the sound of the zither. 

 

模 


OJ: mu OC: *mâ 

LH: ma EMC: muo GO: mo KN: bo 

NOM: mo, mu, mua SV: mô SK: mwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This graph is more commonly used to 
transcribe mo (which see), but in a number of cases it transcribes mu. Almost all 
of the Sino-Xenic data show that 模 should be mo, but Nom preserves a reading 
of mu, showing the presence of a back vowel. The only extant example of this 
graph for mu is in the toponym 相模 sagamu. This usage is found in Nara era 
documents, as well as Nihon shoki, Hitachi fudoki, and Man’yōshū. It is possible 
that the Nihon shoki example is the oldest, which appears but once, in the fortieth 
year of Keikō. By the late ninth century this area is called sagami < *sagamui. As 
I proposed in an earlier work (2008:367, n. 36), if this is actually an Ainu word, 
something like *san-kamui, there may have been two competing pronunciations 
for this place name: sagamu and sagamui. The choice of graphs here may be 
influenced by vowel raising: o > u, perhaps if the ui was represented rather 
sloppily with a graph ending in -o. 

 

無 


OJ: mu OC: *ma 

LH: mua EMC: mju GO: mu KN: bu 

NOM: vô SV: vô SK: mwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram appears once in Kojiki 
in the place name 无邪志 Muzasi (KG). This phonogram is used quite 
extensively in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 4424 

伊呂夫可久 irobukaku How I wish I had dyed 

世奈我許呂母波 senaga koromo pa my beloved’s robes 

曾米麻之乎 somemasi wo a darker color! 


美佐可多婆良婆 misaka tabaraba Then I would clearly see him as 

麻佐夜可爾美無 masa ya ka ni mimu he is allowed through Misaka. 

 

无 


OJ: mu OC: *ma 

LH: mua EMC: mju GO: mu KN: bu 

NOM: vô SV: vô SK: mwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS; it is an abbreviated version of 無 (see 
above). It is this abbreviated version that later results in hiragana ん. 

 

務 


OJ: mu OC: *moh 

LH: muoh EMC: muə GO: mu KN: bu 

NOM: vụ, mùa SV: vụ SK: mwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It is mainly used to transcribe the place 
name Mukwo: 務古. This usage appears once in Nihon shoki. This phonogram 
is also used in Shoki three times in annotational notes and 21 times in poetry: 田 
身山名此云大務 ‘Mount TAMU, this name is read tamu’ (NSG). 

NSK 19 

飫朋佐介珥 oposaka ni If people were to 

菟藝廼煩例屢 tuginoboreru pass down hand to hand 

伊辭務邏塢 isimura wo all the boulders that 

多誤辭珥固佐縻 tagwosi ni kwosaba make up Mount Ōsaka, 

固辭介氐務介茂 kwosikatemu kamo perhaps it could be moved. 

There is only one poem in Man’yōshū which uses this phonogram: 

MYS 3851 

心乎之 KOKORO wo si If I at least 

無何有乃郷爾 mugau no SATWO ni left my heart in 

置而有者 OKITE ARABA Mugau Village, 

藐姑射能山乎 MAkwoYA no YAMA wo then I would be closer 

見末久知香谿務 MImaku tiKAkyemu for looking at Mount Makoya. 

 

霧 


OJ: mu OC: *moh 

LH: muoh EMC: mjuh GO: mu KN: bu 

NOM: vụ SV: vụ SK: mwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears twice in the poetry in Nihon shoki. 

NSK 27 

烏波利珥 wopari ni Here stands a pine 

多陀珥霧伽弊流 tada mukapyeru facing straight in 

比苔菟麻菟阿波例 pitotu matu apare the direction of Owari; 

比等菟麻菟 pitotu matu yes, a single pine. 

比苔珥阿利勢麼 pito ni ariseba If this tree were a man, 

岐農岐勢摩之塢 kinu kisemasi wo I would dress you in your 

 garments. 

多知波開摩之塢 tati pakemasi wo I would gird you with your 

 sword. 


夢 


OJ: mu OC: *məŋ 

LH: muŋ EMC: mjuŋ GO: mu, mumu KN: bou 

NOM: mòng, mồng SV: mông, mộng SK: mwong 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only in Nihon shoki in three 
different poems. 

NSK 91 

於彌能姑能 omi no kwo no The son of the Omi has 

耶賦能之魔柯枳 yapu no sibagaki made a fine brushwood fence. 

始陀騰余瀰 sitatoyomi But if the earth quakes 

那爲我與釐據魔 nawi ga yorikiba that brushwood fence 

耶黎夢之魔柯枳 yaremu sibagaki will likely fall to pieces. 

There are several manuscripts of Hokekyō ongi that gloss 夢 as mumu or 
mun, perhaps a holdover from when some speakers tried to process the velarnasal 
-ŋ as a nasal plus a vowel. 

 

謀 


OJ: mu OC: *mə 

LH: muə > mu EMC: mjəu GO: mu KN: bu 

NOM: mưu SV: mưu SK: mwo, mwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and while it is used specifically for OJ 
mo in Nihon shoki (which see), there is only one known case of it transcribing mu, 
found in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 509 

莫告我 NA NORI SO GA ‘Tell not your name’ seaweed— 

奈騰可聞妹尓 nado kamo IMWO ni how could I come here without 

不告来二計謀 NORAZU KInikyemu telling my wife I was leaving? 

 

鵡 


OJ: mu OC: *maʔ 

LH: muaʔ EMC: mjuʔ GO: mu KN: bu 

NOM: vũ, vọ SV: vũ SK: mwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 1431 

百済野乃 KUDARANWO no Has he called out yet, 

芽古枝爾 PAGWI NO PURUYE ni the bush warbler perched 

待春跡 PARU MATU TO on the barren branch of bush 

居之鶯 WORIsi UGUPISU clover on the moor of Kudara 

鳴爾鶏鵡鴨 NAKInikyemu KAMO who waits for spring? 

It is likely that this rare graph 鵡 has been selected to fill the trigraph coda 
of this poem (鶏 ‘chiken’ 鵡 ‘parrot’ 鴨 ‘wild duck’), which have specific 
calls, perhaps providing an acoutisc background for the beauty of the call of the 
鶯 ‘bush warbler.’ 

 


儛 


OJ: mu OC: *maʔ 

LH: muɑʔ EMC: muə GO: mu KN: bu 

NOM: NA SV: vũ SK: mwu 

Usage / History: 

This extremely rare phonogram belongs to the LJS. I am not sure why this 
does not appear in Ōno, unless the manuscript of Man’yōshū he relied on has a 
corrupted variation, where some manuscripts show the following corruption: 儛 
> 舞 > 無. As far as I can determine this phonogram was used as a phonogram 
only once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 813 

可武奈何良 kamunagara Oh how we should revere 

可武佐備伊麻須 kamusabwi imasu these wonderous jewels 

久志美多麻 kusi mitama that are divine, endowed 

伊麻能遠都豆尓 ima no wotutu ni with a heavenly quality, 

多布刀伎呂可儛 taputwokiro kamu and are even now before us. 

 

茂 


OJ: mu OC: *muh 

LH: muh EMC: məuh GO: mu KN: bou 

NOM: mậu SV: mậu SK: mwu 

Usage / History: 

See this phonogram under OJ mo. 

 

六 


OJ: mu OC: *ruk 

LH: liuk EMC: ljuk GO: roku KN: riku 

NOM: lục SV: lục SK: lwuk 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ mu ‘six.’ There is one name in Nihon shoki, 
the reign of Keikō 六雁臣, but this is glossed as MUTU KARI OMI (NSG), 
though it may have been MUKARI. This usage also appears fairly frequently in 
Man’yōshū: 

MYS 4 

玉尅春 TAMAKIPARU On the great moor of Uchi, 

内乃大野尓 UTI no OPONWO ni the place of gemstone cutting, 

馬數而 UMA NAMETE the horses are likely lined up, 

朝布麻須等六 ASA pumasuRAMU trampling the morning grass, 

其草深野 SONO KUSABUKANWO that field of deep grass. 

 

身 


OJ: mu OC: *lhin 

LH: śin EMC: śjen GO: simu KN: sin 

NOM: thân SV: thân SK: sin 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ word mu, the bound form of mwi 
(from *mui) ‘body.’ There is some debate about how this graph should be read in 
Nihon shoki. Ōno (1977:827) notes that there are five examples of 身 
representing mwi, but I have only found one, which is listed above under mwi. 
There are many examples of this graph transcribing mu: 身狭 Musa (NSG), 身 
毛津君 MUGETU KIMI (NSG), 田身輪邑 TAMUWA Village (NSG), 身刺 


MUZASI (NSG), 土師連身 PAZI [NO] MURAZI MU (NSG), 於田身嶺…田身 
山名、此云大務 ‘at TAMU Peak...TAMU is the name of a mountain. The name 
is read tamu’ (NSG), 能登臣馬身龍 Noto OMI MaMU TATU (NSG), 小竹田 
史身 SINWODA [NO] PUBITO MU (NSG), 身毛君廣 MUGETU KIMI PIRO 
(NSG), 伊賀國伊賀郡身野 Iga Province Iga District MUNWO (NSG). 

 

牛鳴 



OJ: mu OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: NA GO: NA KN: NA 

NOM: NA SV: NA SK: NA 

Usage / History: 

This kungana is based on the Chinese phrase: 牛鳴 ‘ox cries,’ which calls 
to mind the sound an ox makes: moo. This appears once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 2839 

如是爲哉 KAKUSITE YA Will it continue to protect us 

猶八戍牛鳴 NAPO YA MAMORAMU as it has thus far? 

大荒木之 OPOARAKWI NO Though it is not 

浮田之社之 UKITA NO MORI NO the sacred rope of 

標爾不有爾 SIME ni ARANAKU ni the Ukita Shrine. 

 

目 



OJ: muku OC: *muk 

LH: muk EMC: mjuk GO: moku KN: boku 

NOM: mục SV: mục SK: mwok 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and this usage is very rare. It appears 
once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 1087 

痛足河 ANASIGAPA Waves have formed 

河浪立奴 KAPA NAMI TATInu on the river Anasigawa. 

巻目之 MAKIMUKU NO It seems that clouds 

由槻我高仁 yuTUKWI ga TAKE ni are rising above Yutsuki Peak 

雲居立良志 KUMWOWI TATUrasi in Makimuku. 

 

未 


OJ: mwi OC: *məs 

LH: mus EMC: mjweih GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: mùi SV: mùi, vị SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This phonogram appears on numerous 
stele, mirror and other inscriptions, but in all these cases it is either used as one of 
the Earthly Branches in the Chinese calendar, sheep, or it is used grammatically 
as ‘not yet.’ This phonogram is preserved in Nihon shoki in the record of Sushun, 
recording the name of a Paekche individual: 寺工太良未太 temple architect 
Dara Mwida. This same name is preserved in Gankōji engi as 丈羅未大 Dara 
Mwida. This usage is interesting, because 丈 is Later Han ɖiaŋʔ, thus showing 
that d- here is appropriate. 

This phonogram also appears in Gankōji engi, transcribing the name 未沙乃 
Mwisano. This phonogram also appears in the Chikuzen Census of 702 in the 
name 未豆賣 Mwitumye. This phonogram also appears on a number of 


mokkan: 謹申木未呂阿何波知・木未呂和礼波知 ‘I humbly declare, MOKU 
Mwiro, my begging bowl, MOKU Mwiro, I am…’ (unnumbered tablet). 

Perhaps because of its grammatical nature, this graph is not used in Kojiki. It 
is used in two annotational notes and six times in poetry in Nihon shoki: 香菓此 
云箇倶能未 “ ‘fruit with the everlasting fragrance’ is read kakunomwi” (NSG). 

NSK 37 

彌知能之利 miti no siri I had heard about 

古破儾塢等綿塢 kwopada wotomye wo the maiden from Kohada 

伽未能語等 kamwi no goto in the land behind the road, 

枳虚曳之介廼 kikoyesikado her reputation like thunder, 

阿比摩區羅摩區 apimakura maku but here we lie together. 

This phonogram is the principal graph used in Man’yōshū, appearing 86 
times in the work, the highest concentration found in Book 15. 

MYS 3669 

多妣尓安礼杼 tabi ni aredo Though on a journey 

欲流波火等毛之 yworu pa PWI tomosi here am I 

乎流和礼乎 woru ware wo lighting a torch at night— 

也未尓也伊毛我 yamwi ni ya imwo ga perhaps my beloved 

古非都追安流良牟 kwopwitutu aruramu is yearning for me in the dark. 

 

味 


OJ: mwi OC: *məs 

LH: mus EMC: mjweih GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: mùi, vị SV: vị SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in Paekche names like 那率 
福富味身 Pukpu Mwisin of the sixth rank, 味摩之 Mwimasi, 内佐平岐味 
Internal Administrator Kimwi. This phonogram appears several times on 
mokkan: 佐味 Samwi (MK 4722), 百斉体万呂 佐味梶取 KUDARA ?Maro 
and Navigator Samwi (MK 4567). 

This phonogram also appears in Kojiki, but only once in a song sung by 
Yamato Takeru. 

KK 23 

夜都米佐須 yatume sasu The eight buds come out— 

伊豆毛多祁流賀 idumwo takyeru ga the hilt of the Izumo 

波祁流多知 pakyeru tati warrior’s sword 

都豆良佐波麻岐 tudura sapa maki is indeed magnificient: 

佐味那志爾阿波禮 samwi nasi ni apare sadly it has no blade. 

This phonogram is not used in the annotational notes or poetry in Nihon 
shoki, but it does appear in two surnames, 佐味君 Samwi KIMI and 佐味朝臣 
Samwi ASOMI. 

This phonogram only appears five times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 58 

何所爾可 IDUKU ni ka Where have they moored 

船泊爲良武 PUNAPATE SUramu by this time? 

安禮乃埼 are no SAKI Have they rowed 

榜多味行之 KOGItamwi YUKIsi around the cape of Are, 

棚無小舟 TANA NASI WOBUNE that little boat with no shelf? 


微 


OJ: mwi OC: *məi 

LH: mui EMC: mjwei GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: vi SV: vi SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in the Kojiki, and this is the 
main graph used to transcribe mwi in the poetry: 

KK 94 

久佐加延能 kusakaye no The inlet of Kusaka, 

伊理延能波知須 iriye no patisu the lotus of the inlet— 

波那婆知須 panabatisu the blossoms of the lotus 

微能佐加理毘登 mwi no sakaribito how envious I am 

登母志岐呂加母 tomosikiro kamo of the youth who are in bloom. 

In Nihon shoki this phonogram appears twice in the annotational notes and 
four times in song: 岐神、此云布那斗能加微 “ ‘deity of the fork in the road’ 
is read punatwo no kamwi” (NSG). 

NSK 112 

禹都麻佐波 utumasa pa Utsumasa Kahakatsu 

柯微騰母柯微騰 kamwi tomo kamwi to will punish and chastise 

枳擧曳倶屢 kikoyekuru the deity of the eternal land 

騰與預能柯微乎 tokoyo no kamwi wo who we have heard is 

宇智岐多麻須母 utikitanasu mo the supreme deity among all 

 deities. 

This is also the only phonogram used in the Bussokuseki poetic sequence 
for mwi: 

BSS 18 

比止乃微波 pito no mwi pa As for the body of man, 

衣賀多久阿礼婆 egataku areba since it is difficult to re-obtain 

乃利乃多能 nori no ta no for the dharma 

与須加止奈礼利 yosuka to nareri it has become a refuge— 

都止米毛呂毛呂 tutome moromoro be diligent all of you! 

須々賣毛呂母呂 susumye moromoro Press forward all of you! 

 

尾 


OJ: mwi OC: *məiʔ 

LH: muiʔ EMC: mjweiʔ GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: vĩ, vã, vải SV: vĩ SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in a name on a Buddhist 
inscription at Sairinji Temple, which is dated 658: 汙麻尾古 Umamwikwo. It 
also appears in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 804 

等伎能佐迦利乎 toki no sakari wo Unable to hang on to 

等々尾迦禰 todomwikane the best of those times 

周具斯野利都礼 sugusiyariture time has marched on. 

美奈乃和多 mina no wata Upon this black hair, 

迦具漏伎可美尓 kagurwoki kami ni black as the guts of the snail, 

伊都乃麻可 itu no ma ka frost has lighted 

斯毛乃布利家武 simwo no purikyemu without my knowing it. 


身 


OJ: mwi OC: *lhin 

LH: śin EMC: śjen GO: simu KN: sin 

NOM: thân SV: thân SK: sin 

Usage / History: 

This kungana conjures up OJ mwi ‘body.’ This usage is quite old, and 
appears in the earliest extant census. The oldest datable example appears in the 
Mino Census of 702 in names such as 身麻呂 MWImaro, 身賣 MWImye, 
and 石身賣 IPAMWImye or ISIMWImye. It also appears the Takada stone 
monument, dated 726, where the name 身麿 MWImaro appears. 

This usage appears in Nihon shoki, in the name of 根連金身 NE MURAZI 
KANEMWI (NSG), but this is the only example I can find where 身 transcribes 
mwi. There are many examples where it transcribes mu, which see. 

This kungana appears in Man’yōshū three times: 

MYS 2207 

吾屋戸之 WA GA YADWO NO The miscanthus at the gate of 

浅芧色付 ASADI IRODUKU my house is in full color. 

吉魚張之 YONABARI NO On the field of Natsumi in 

夏身之上爾 NATUMWI NO UPE ni Yonabari it seems that an early 

四具禮零疑 sigure PURURASI autumn drizzle is falling. 

 

實 


OJ: mwi OC: *m-lit 

LH: źit EMC: dźjet GO: ziti KN: situ 

NOM: thật, thiệt SV: thực SK: sil 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ my ‘fruit.’ This usage appears in the 
Chikuzen Census of 702: 歳實 TOSIMWI, 木實 KWIMWI. This graph is 
also used in Man’yōshū for the place name Natsumi, 夏實 NATUMWI (MYS 
375). 

 

箕 


OJ: mwi OC: *kə 

LH: kɨə > kɨ EMC: kjɨ GO: ki KN: ki 

NOM: kia, kìa SV: ki SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This kungana is based on the association of OJ mwi ‘winnowing basket.’ 
This usage appears in Man’yōshū to transcribe Natsumi 夏箕 NATUMWI 
(MYS 1737) or 浦箕 URAMWI ‘(sailing) around the bay’ (MYS 509, 1671, 
2735). 

 

密 


OJ: mwi(tu) OC: *mrit 

LH: mɨt EMC: mjet GO: miti KN: bitu 

NOM: mật SV: mật SK: mil 

Usage / History: 

This extremely rare usage appears in Hitachi fudoki in the toponym 密筑里 
Mwituki Village. This phonogram was likely selected for its dental final: mwit + 
tuki. There are examples of this preserved on wooden tablets that have been 
excavated, where parts of Buddhist sutras were written down, containing the 
word 波羅密陀 (MKK 2:49) or 波羅密多 (MKK 22:163) paramwita, a 


transcription of pārāmita, or the six virtues one strives to attain on one’s way to 
enlightenment. 

 

模 


OJ: mwo OC: *mâ 

LH: ma > mɔ EMC: muo GO: mo KN: bo 

NOM: mo, mô, mu SV: mô SK: mwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears once in Wei zhi, transcribing 
the title 多模 *ta-mɔ; it also appears in a personal name of a king of Koguryŏ as 
recorded in Wei zhi: 伊夷模 *i-i-mɔ. This graph also appears in several 
inscriptions from the peninsula. On the Kwangkaytho stele: 臼模盧城 *ɡu-mɔlɔ 
fortress, 若模盧城 *niak-mɔ-lɔ fortress, 古模耶羅城 *kɔ-mɔ-ya-ra fortress. 

This phonogram appears later in Nihon shoki, but appears only twice, in the 
same poem: 

NSK 114 

模騰渠等爾 motogoto ni Though blossoms are blooming 

婆那播左該騰模 pana pa sakyedomo at the trunk of every tree, 

那爾騰柯母 nani to kamo why is it that my lovely 

于都倶之伊母我 utukusi imo ga beloved has not come 

磨陀左枳涅渠農 mata sakidekonu and bloomed again? 

 

謨 


OJ: mwo OC: *mâʔ 

LH: ma > mɔ EMC: muo GO: mo KN: bo 

NOM: mo, mô SV: mô SK: mwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, appearing in one title in Wei zhi: 泄謨 
觚 *satu-mɔ-kɔ. This phonogram makes another appearance in Nihon shoki, 
once in annotational note, and eight times in song in the latter end of Nihon 
shoki: 伐本截末、此云謨登岐利須衞於茲波羅比 “ ‘cut the base and clear 
away the upper branches’ is read moto kiri suwe osiparapi”(NSG). 

NSK 116 

伊磨紀那屢 imakwi naru Above the knoll 

乎武例我禹杯爾 womure ga upe ni that is Imaki— 

倶謨娜尼母 kumo dani mo if even a cloud 

旨屢倶之多々婆 sirukusi tataba would clearly rise up 

那爾柯那皚柯武 nani ka nagekamu then I would not lament. 

 

毛 


OJ: mwo OC: *mâu 

LH: mau EMC: mâu GO: mou KN: bou 

NOM: mao, mau SV: mao SK: mwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in Paekche material quoted in 
Nihon shoki, in names such as 毛麻利叱智 Mwomari Siti, 眞毛津 Sin-mwosin, 
and 高麗侍醫毛治 a personal doctor from Kwoma called Moudi. This 
phonogram appears seven times in the liturgies, three times for the particle mo, 
and four times for mwopa ‘seaweed’: 山野能物波甘菜辛菜、青海原能物波波 
多能広物波多能狭物奥都毛波邊津毛波爾至麻弖 YAMANWO no MONO pa 


AMANA KARANA, AWOMI [NO] PARA no MONO pa pata no PIROMONO pata no 
SAMONO, OKItu mwopa pyeTU mwopa ni ITARU made “Including things down to 
sweet herbs and bitter herbs from the mountain moors, things with wide fins and 
narrow fins from the ocean plains, and seaweed from the offing and close to the 
shore” (NT 5). This phonogram appears a few times on various mokkan: 毛豆久 
mwoduku ‘a type of seaweed’ (MK 1261), 毛美良女 MwomiraMYE (MK 2340), 
伊毛売 Imwomye (MK 798), 召志良木人毛利今急 ‘Summon Mwori, a man 
from SiraKWI. Hurry now…’ (MK 3586). 

This is the principal phonogram used in Kojiki to transcribe mwo: 

KK 41 

知婆能 tiba no Filled with leaves, 

加豆怒袁美禮婆 kadunwo wo mireba when I look at Kazuno 

毛毛知陀流 mwomwo tidaru I can also see countless 

夜迩波母美由 yanipa mo miyu houses and yards. 

久爾能富母美由 kuni no po mo miyu I also see the heights of the land. 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, four times in annotational notes 
and 28 times in the poetry: 亦煮蝦蟆爲上味。名曰毛瀰 “They also boiled 
frogs for their delicacy. These are called mwomi” (NSG); 汝妹、此云儺迩毛 
“ ‘my beloved’ is read nanimwo”(NSG). 

NSK 11 

愛瀰詩烏 emisi wo The barbarian 

毘儾利 pidari having been insulted— 

毛々那比苔 mwomwo napi to though people say 

比苔破易陪廼毛 pito pa ipedomo they have seen a 100 battles 

多牟伽毘毛勢儒 tamukapi mo sezu these do not even resist. 

This phonogram is also very prevalent in Man’yōshū, but by the period of 
this anthology, the orthographic rules which kept 毛 mwo separate from 母 mo 
had been confused, aside from that found in Books 5 and 15. If we count the 
overall usage in the anthology, 毛 appears 1751 times, while 母 appears 1061 
times. If the focus is limited to Book 5, we find 母 115 times, with 毛 only 49 
(cf. Bentley 2002). 

A good example of the confusion of mo versus mwo appears in the very first 
poem in the anthology. 

MYS 1 

籠毛與 KWO mo yo Ah, a basket, 

美籠母乳 mi KWO moTI carrying a fine basket— 

布久思毛與 pukusi mo yo ah, a scoop, 

美夫君志持 mibukusi MOTI carrying a fine scoop— 

此岳尓 KONO WOKA ni maiden picking herbs 

菜採須兒 NA TUMAsu KWO on this hillock, 

家吉奈 IPYE NORAna tell me of your home. 

名告紗根 NA NORAsaNE Tell me your name. 

虚見津 SWORA MITU The land of Yamato 

山跡乃國者 YAMATO no KUNI PA which fills the firmament, 

押奈戸手 OSInaBETE every nook and cranny 

吾許曾居 WARE koso WORE I alone rule over! 


師吉名倍手 sikiNAbeTE The entire realm 

吾己曾座 WARE koso IMASE I alone govern! 

我許背齒 WA koSO BA Then it shall be I 

告目 NORAME who will tell you 

家呼毛名雄母 IPYE wo mo NA WO mo of my home and also my name. 

This phonogram is used in the Bussoku stele sequence, along with 母. 

BSS 8 

己乃美阿止乎 kono miato wo Seeking and searching 

多豆祢毛止米弖 tatunemotomete this august footprint 

与伎比止乃 yoki pito no to the land where 

伊麻須久尓々波 imasu kuni nipa the righteous person resides; 

和礼毛麻胃弖牟 ware mo mawitemu I would also venture there, 

毛呂毛呂乎爲弖 moromoro wo wite leading the masses. 

The cursive form of this phonogram becomes hiragana も , while a 
simplified writing of 毛 results in katakana モ. 

 

賣 


OJ: mye OC: *mrêh 

LH: mɛh EMC: maɨh GO: mai KN: bai 

NOM: mại SV: mại SK: may 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Kwangkaytho stele, in 
the place name 農賣城 *noŋ-mɛh Fortress and in the ethnonym 賣勾余民国 
the people of *mɛh-ko-yo. This graph also appears in a vestige of Prince 
Shōtoku’s genealogy, with the name 伊斯賣支彌 Isimye Kimi. The earliest 
datable example appears on the Yamana Village stele (dated 681), where the 
name 黒賣刀自 KURWOmye Twozi appears. This phonogram appears in the 
liturgies seven times: 御 膳 持 須 留 若 宇 加 能 賣 能 命 登 御 名 者 白 弖 
OPOMIKEMOTI suru WAKAukanomye no MIKOTO to MINA PA MAWAOSIte “We 
announce the name of Waka Ukame no Mikoto who has charge over the imperial 
food…” (NT 3). This phonogram appears a number of times on mokkan: 乎波売 
Wopamye (MK 3291), 久 努売斐 Kunumyepwi (MK 3345), □ 尓 久売 
Xnikumye (MK 2134). 

This is the principal phonogram used to transcribe mye in Kojiki, in words 
such as 袁登賣 wotomye ‘maiden,’ 愛上比賣 Epimye ‘land of Ehime,’ and 比 
賣 pimye ‘princess.’ It is also used exclusively in the poetry. 

KK 33 

袁登賣能 wotomye no The great blade 

登許能辨爾 toko no bye ni of the sword 

和賀淤岐斯 wa ga okisi I left by the bed 

都流岐能多知 turugi no tati of the maiden— 

曾能多知波夜 sono tati pa ya Ah! That sword. 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki in names such as 比賣語曾社 
神 ‘Pimyegoso Shrine’ (NSG), 彌賣嶋 ‘Mimye Island’ (NSG), and 越道君伊 
羅都賣 ‘Iratumye, the daughter of KWOSI [NO] KIMI’ (NSG). It also appears in 
two annotation notes, and in three times in song: 醜女、此云志許賣 “ ‘ugly 
women’ is read sikomye” (NSG). 


NSK 18 

瀰磨紀 mimakwi Woe is Mimaki 

異利寐胡播揶 iribikwo paya Iribiko! 

飫廼餓烏塢 ono ga wo wo Occupying himself 

志齊務苔 sisemu to with a princess, 

農殊末句志羅珥 nusumaku sirani unaware that someone is 

比賣那素寐殊望 pimye na swobi su mo waiting to take his life. 

This is also one of the principal phonograms used to transcribe mye in 
Man’yōshū, appearing roughly 68 times. 

MYS 77 

吾大王 WA GA OPOKIMI My great lord, 

物莫御念 MONO NA OMOPOSI do not worry about things. 

須賣神乃 sumye KAMWI no The imperial deities are near, 

嗣而賜流 SWOPETE TAMAPYEru and it is not true that 

吾莫勿久尓 WA GA NAKE NAku ni I have disappeared. 

This is also the main graph used in the Bussoku stele sequence poems: 

BSS 6 

麻須良乎乃 masurawo no As we gaze at the trodden 

須々美佐岐多知 susumi sakitati footprints of the captain 

布賣留阿止乎 pumyeru ato wo who had gone on ahead 

美都々志乃波牟 mitutu sinopamu we will yearn for him; 

多太尓阿布麻弖尓 tada ni apu made ni until we meet him directly; 

麻佐尓阿布麻弖尓 masa ni apu made ni until we truly meet him. 

 

咩 


OJ: mye OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: miə GO: miya, mii, mei KN: NA 

NOM: me SV: NA SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This is a rare graph, and semantically 
represents the sound of sheep bleating. The glosses of this phonogram in the 
various manuscripts of Hokekyō ongi are varied. Here I list all glosses of this 
phonogram from the various manuscripts (Ogura 1995.2:1170–1183): mei, mi, 
kamu, miyau, mii, yau, fiya. A few, like kamu and yau, are obvious mistakes or 
attempts to gloss an unfamiliar phonogram that had been corrupted, as some 
manuscripts have 咩 as 哶. For the time being, the three most common readings 
are miya, mii, and mei, which are possible Go-on readings. 

The earliest datable instance of this graph is from the Chikuzen Census of 
702: 咩豆賣 Myetumye. This phonogram also appears once in Kojiki, in 當摩 
之咩斐 Tagima NO Myepwi. This phonogram appears three times in the liturgies, 
each to write 比咩 pimye ‘princess, female deity’ (NT 10). 

This graph also appears in four annotational notes and in two songs in Nihon 
shoki: 少女、此云烏等咩 “ ‘Maiden’ is read wotomye” (NSG). 

NSK 35 

瀰菟遇利能 mituguri no But hidden within 

那伽菟曳能 nakatuye no the middle branches 


府保語茂利 pupwogomori we spy a maiden 

阿伽例蘆塢等咩 akareru wotomye who is red, like the blossom. 

伊奘佐伽麼曳那 iza sakabaye na Come! Bloom and shine for us. 

There are only six examples of this phonogram in Man’yōshū, all 
concentrated in Book 5: 

MYS 882 

阿我農斯能 aganusi no If I receive the spiritual power 

美多麻多麻比弖 mitama tamapite of my Lord, 

波流佐良婆 paru saraba then when spring comes 

奈良能美夜故尓 nara no miyakwo ni please summon me back 

咩佐宜多麻波祢 myesagye tamapane to the capital in Nara. 

 

馬 


OJ: mye OC: *mrâʔ 

LH: maʔ EMC: maʔ GO: me KN: ba 

NOM: mã SV: mã SK: ma 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. I placed 馬 ma in the WS because of 
its use in representing many toponyms in Wa / Yamato. This reading mye is 
attested mainly in Man’yōshū, but some manuscripts of Shoki gloss 馬 as it 
appears in Paekche materials quoted as me. Consider the following examples as 
preserved in Nihon shoki, but with glosses taken from Shiki as recorded in Shaku 
Nihongi. In the 10th month of Kinmei there is an individual from Paekche called 
馬次文, and glossed ma-si-mon. In an entry in the following year, this individual 
is called 馬進文, glossed ma-sin-mon. Also in the 11th year of Kinmei another 
Paekche individual is mentioned, called 馬武, glossed ma-mu. In 15th year of 
Kinmei, another man of Paekche is mentioned, 馬丁安, glossed ma-tiyau-an. It 
is not improbable that these may have actually been me, but for the time being I 
focus only on Man’yōshū regarding 馬 used to transcribe mye. 

MYS 3236 

石田之社之 IPATA NO MORI NO To the imperial deities 

須馬神尓 sumye KAMWI ni at the Iwata Shrine 

奴左取向而 nusa TORIMUKYETE I hold to offer paper offerings— 

吾者越徃 WARE PA KWOYEYUKU I am on my way over, 

相坂山遠 APUSAKA YAMA wo over Mount Ausaka. 

 

面 


OJ: mye OC: *mens 

LH: mianh EMC: mjiän GO: memu KN: ben 

NOM: diện SV: diện, riện SK: myen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears twice Man’yōshū. 

MYS 873 

余呂豆余尓 yoroduyo ni Let us pass down this tradition 

可多利都夏等之 kataritugye to si to the myriad generations— 

許能多氣仁 kono take ni it seems she waved 

比例布利家良之 pire purikyerasi her scarf on this peak, 

麻通羅佐用嬪面 matura saywo pimye Princess Sayo of Matsura. 


It is possible that this graph is being used both for its phonological as well as 
its semantic value, along with 嬪 ‘wife’; thus wife and 面 ‘countenance.’ 

 

迷 


OJ: mye OC: *mî 

LH: mei EMC: miei GO: mei KN: bei 

NOM: mê SV: mê SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in two annotational notes in 
Nihon shoki: 罔象女、此云瀰菟破廼迷 “ ‘sacred water women’ is read 
mitupanomye” (NSG); 稻魂女、此云于伽能迷 “ ‘food and drink woman’ is 
read ukanomye” (NSG). 

 

謎 


OJ: mye OC: *mîh 

LH: meih EMC: mieih GO: mai, mei KN: bei 

NOM: mê SV: mê SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in three annotational notes 
and 10 different poems in Nihon shoki: 言哭女、此云儺倶謎 “The individual 
called 哭女 is to be read nakumye” (NSG). 

NSK 64 

於朋佐箇珥 oposaka ni I met a young maiden 

阿布夜烏等謎烏 apu ya wotomye wo on my way to Ōsaka. 

瀰知度沛麼 miti twopeba I asked the way— 

哆駄珥破能邏孺 tada nipa norazu she did not say go straight, 

哆𡺸摩知烏能流 tagimati wo noru but to take the Tagima Road. 

 

綿 


OJ: mye OC: NA 

LH: mian EMC: mjiän GO: men KN: ben 

NOM: mên, men, min SV: miên SK: myen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in three poems in Nihon 
shoki. 

NSK 38 

彌知能之利 miti no siri This maiden from 

古波儾塢等綿 kwopada wotomye Kohada behind the road 

阿羅素破儒 araswopazu is wonderful, 

泥辭區塢之敘 nesiku wosi zo for she has lain with me 

于蘆波辭彌茂布 urupasimi mopu offering no resistance. 

 

明 


OJ: mye OC: *mraŋ 

LH: mɨaŋ EMC: mjɐŋ LMC: miajŋ GO: miyau KN: mei 

NOM: minh, miêng SV: minh SK: myeng 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in a phonetic rendering of 天 
皇 in Ryō no shūge: 須明楽美御徳 sumyera mikoto. As Ōno (1962:479) points 
out, this transcription was done more for visual effect than an attempt at a perfect 


one-to-one match, as these graphs could be read sumeiraku migotoko. As is these 
graphs roughly mean ‘moustache-bright-music-beautiful-august-virtue.’ 

 

女 


OJ: mye OC: *nraʔ 

LH: ṇiaʔ EMC: ṇjwoʔ GO: nyo KN: dyo 

NOM: nữ, nớ, nợ, nữa SV: nhữ, nữ, nứ SK: nye 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ mye ‘woman.’ I have found four 
examples of this kungana in Man’yōshū: 三犬女乃浦能 MINUMYE no URA no 
‘(in the offing) of the bay of Minume’ (MYS 946, 1065), 見宿女乃浦者 
MINUMYE no URA PA ‘the bay of Minume’ (MYS 1066), and 戀乃余杼女留 
KWOPWI no yodoMYEru ‘(your) yearning is dormant’ (MYS 2721). 

 

婦 


OJ: mye OC: *bəʔ 

LH: buʔ EMC: bjəuʔ GO: bu KN: fuu 

NOM: phụ, vợ SV: phụ SK: pwu 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ mye ‘women, wife.’ Jidai betsu kokugo 
daijiten (1967:901) claims this usage appears in Man’yōshū, but I have not found 
any examples. It is possible that there is some graphic confusion between 女 
and 婦, though this seems unlikely. A possible example from excavated wooden 
tablets appears on a mokkan dated 767: 越中国婦負郡川合郷 KWOSI-[NO]- 
NAKA Province (Etchū), MYEPI District, Kapapi Village (MK 31). 

 


N 

 

 

奴 



OJ: na OC: *nâ 

LH: nɑ EMC: nuo GO: nu KN: do 

NOM: nô, no, nó SV: nô SK: nwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, where it appears as early as 57 CE, 
transcribing the domain name Na 奴国. This reading of na appears to have been 
preserved in the PBS, perhaps because of a conservative stratum of Chinese on 
the peninsula. This evidence comes from Nihon shoki, with glosses that have 
consistently transcribed 奴 in Paekche names as na. The following names in 
Nihon shoki preserve the reading of na: 沙々奴跪 Sasanakwo (NSG), 阿禮奴 
跪 Arenakwo (NSG), and 津守連己麻奴跪 TUMORI MURAZI Komanakwo 
(NSG)—all three from Paekche or born of Paekche parents in Japan. By around 
400 CE the vowel of this graph had rounded to [no] (cf. Coblin 1994:150). In 
Japan nwo later underwent vowel raising to nu (see OJ: nwo and OJ: nu). 

 

那 


OJ: na OC: *nâi 

LH: nɑi > nɑ EMC: nâ GO: na KN: da 

NOM: na, ná, nả, nà SV: na, ná, nả SK: na 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in the title of an official: 彌 
彌那利 *me-me-na-ri. This phonogram also appears on the Kwangkaytho stele: 
那旦城 *na-tan fortress, and 散那城 *san-na fortress. 

This phonogram also appears in Silla inscriptions. From the Tanyang 
inscription there is the place name 那利村 Nari Village. Also on the Naengsuri 
inscription there is the apparent personal name 那斯利 *na-se-ri, and the place 
name 蘇那支 *sɔ-na-ke. 

This graph also appears in the Suiko corpus, in the following genealogy 
preserved in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu: 名伊志支那郎女 “Named Princess 
Isikina IRATUMYE.” 怒那久良布刀多麻斯支天皇 “Great King Nunakura 
Putwo Tamasiki.” Ōno (1977:24) notes that in the Suiko era corpus 奈 is much 
more prevalent as a phonogram than 那. This is perhaps because 那 ‘which, 
what, that’ was semantically loaded, making it more difficult to use as a 
phonogram than 奈 ‘apple-pear.’ 

In spite of this difficulty, 那 was still used very productively in Japan. It 
appears three times in the liturgies: 狭久那多利爾下賜水乎 SAkunatari ni 
SITASITAMAPU MIDU wo “…the water that issues forth (from the mountains) with 
great energy…” (NT 3). This phonogram appears on a variety of mokkan: 那貴 
首毛人 Nakwi OBITO KEPITO (MK 27), 伊豆国那可郡和志郷 Idu Province 
Naga District Wasi Village (MK 3197). 

Also, notice that in Kojiki 那 is used a total of 248 times, while 奈 is never 
used (奈 is reserved for the question 奈何 ‘how, why?’). A few examples 
illustrate this usage: 登美能那賀須泥毘古 Tomi no Nagasunebikwo ‘Nagasune 


Hiko of Tomi’ (KG), 古那美 kwonami ‘main wife,’ 宇波那理賀 upanari 
‘second wife’ (KG). 

KK 85 

意富岐美袁 opokimi wo If you banish me, 

斯麻爾波夫良婆 sima ni paburaba your great lord, to an island, 

布那阿麻理 puna amari then I will definitely return 

伊賀幣理許牟敍 igapyerikomu zo like a vast floating armada. 

和賀多多彌由米 wa ga tatami yume Be vigiliant regarding 

許登袁許曾 koto wo koso my reed mats. When I mention 

多多美登伊波米 tatami to ipame my reed mats I really mean: 

和賀都麻波由米 wa ga tuma pa yume be vigiliant with my spouse. 

The phonogram 那 appears 18 times in the annotational notes and 70 times 
in the poetry in Nihon shoki: 沫蕩、此云阿和那伎 “ ‘Foam settles,’ this is read 
awanagi” (NSG), 岐神、此云布那斗能加微 “ ‘Deity of the forked road,’ this 
is read punatwo no kamwi” (NSG), 毀、此云波那豆 “ ‘break down,’ this is 
read panatu” (NSG). 

NSK 104 

斯那提流 sinateru Starving for want of food 

箇多烏箇夜摩爾 katawokayama ni on Mount Kataoka, 

伊比爾惠弖 ipi ni wete the shining hill, 

許夜勢屢 koyaseru how pitiful is that farmer 

諸能多比等阿波禮 sono tapito apare who has fallen. 

於夜那斯爾 oya nasi ni Surely you were not 

那禮奈理雞迷夜 narenarikyeme ya raised without parents. 

佐須陀氣能 sasu take no Do you have no lord, 

枳彌波夜那祇 kimi paya naki strong like bamboo? 

伊比爾惠弖 ipi ni wete Starving for want of food 

許夜勢留 koyaseru how pitiful is that farmer 

諸能多比等阿波禮 sono tapito apare who has fallen. 

In Man’yōshū 那 is not as prevalent as 奈, but it is still the second most 
popular phonogram for na, appearing 49 times. 

MYS 3781 

多婢尓之弖 tabi ni site Cuckoo, 

毛能毛布等吉尓 mono mopu toki ni do not cry out recklessly 

保等登藝須 pototogisu when I am on a journey 

毛等奈那難吉曽 motona na naki so and thinking about things. 

安我古非麻左流 a ga kwopwi masaru It only increases my longing. 

Here is an example of three different phonograms in a row, each representing 
na: 奈那難. Interesting that the poet wanted to avoid repeating the same graph. 

 

難 


OJ: na, nani OC: *nân < *nar? 

LH: nɑn EMC: nân GO: namu KN: dan 

NOM: nan, nạn, nàn SV: nan, nạn SK: nan 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in Wei zhi in the personal 
name 難升米 *na-nə-səgu-mei which I interpret to mean ‘Sogume of Na.’ Thus 
this phonogram was used to transcribe two syllables. This graph also appears on 


the Kansu inscription of Silla from 568 CE: 与難大舎 Yɑ-nɑn of the 12th rank. 
The same name also appears, with the same spelling, on the Wenli Silla 
inscription from 568 CE. 

This phonogram also appears in the Japanese corpus, but only to write 難波 
Nanipa. One mokkan from an excavation site in the ancient Nara capital contains 
the following place name: 多土評難田 Tazi District, Nanida (MKK 26:22). 
The usage of ‘district’ written 評 suggests this usage pre-dates the Taihō Code 
of 701. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, primarily to represent Nanipa 
難波, but there is one example where it represents na: 

MYS 3781 

多婢尓之弖 tabi ni site Cuckoo, 

毛能毛布等吉尓 mono mopu toki ni do not cry out recklessly 

保等登藝須 pototogisu when I am on a journey 

毛等奈那難吉曽 motona na naki so and thinking about things. 

安我古非麻左流 a ga kwopwi masaru It only increases my longing. 

 

乃 


OJ: na OC: *nə̂ ʔ 

LH: nəʔ EMC: nậiʔ GO: nai KN: dai 

NOM: nảy SV: nãi SK: nay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the first stele of the Silla 
Namsan stelae group: 沙喙音乃古. There are two possible readings for this 
name: If 音 is an abbreviation for 部 then this may be *na-kɔ of the Sa-tśhuas 
District of the Capital. If 部 has been left off, and 音 is a phonogram, then this 
may be *ʔɨm-na-kɔ of the Sa-tśhuas (District) of the Capital. This final reading is 
tempting, because the name almost sounds like a Japanese form of ‘son of Imna 
(Mimana).’ This phonogram also appears in a fragment on the Silla Cheng-tyey 
stele: □失利乃利 ‘(the name) *X-śit-ri-na-ri.’ 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, but in an interesting form that 
strongly suggests peninsular origins. Consider the usage of 乃 appears in the 
following stanaza: 乃楽能婆娑摩儞 nara(k) no pasama ni ‘In the valley of 
Mount Nara….’ (NSK 95). In the 37th year of Nintoku the name of this 
mountain is written 乃羅山, Nara YAMA. I believe that the usage evolved as 
narak > narah > nara. While some may argue that there are other examples 
where -k final graphs are used phonetically for the first syllable, the use of 乃 to 
represent na leads me to believe this to be a peninsular (Paekche?) usage that was 
carried over into Japan. 

This usage also appears on the Daianji Temple stele of 775, with the name 
乃楽之京 ‘capital of Nara(k).’ 

 

奈 


OJ: na OC: *nâs 

LH: nɑs > nɑi EMC: nâih GO: nai KN: dai 

NOM: nài, nại, nạy SV: nại, nai SK: nay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. The place name 奈祇城 *nagi fortress 
appears on the Sataykcicek inscription of Paekche. This graph also appears in 


Silla inscriptions, such as 奈弗耽郝失利 *na-put-təm-xak-sit-ri on the Tanyang 
inscription, and 壱夫智奈麻 *it-pu-te of the 11th rank (nama) from the 
Naengsuri inscription. 

This phonogram also appears in the Suiko era corpus. In Jōgū Shōtoku hōō 
we have names such as: 蘇我伊奈米宿禰 Swoga Iname Sukune, 位奈部橘王 
Prince WinaBYE TATIBANA, and 多至波奈等已比乃弥己等 Tatibana Toyopi 
no mikoto. 

A mokkan excavated from the ruins of the Fujiwara Palace (fl. 694–710) 
contains what appears to be a variant of a famous poem found in the Kana 
preface to the Kokinshū (MK 1613): 

奈尓皮ツ尓 nanipatu ni At the ferry of Naniwa 

佐久矢己乃皮奈 saku YA ko no pana how these blossoms bloom— 

布由己母利 puyu gomori awakening from winter, 

伊真皮々留部止 iMA pa paruPYE to now they say it is almost spring: 

佐久矢□□皮奈 saku YA (ko no?) pana these blossoms in bloom. 

This phonogram appears six times in annotational notes, and 21 times in 
poetry in Nihon shoki song: 訛、此云興許奈磨盧 “ ‘to corrupt (langage)’ is 
read yokonamaru” (NSG). 

NSK 2 

阿妹奈屢夜 ame naru ya In the heavens 

乙登多奈婆多廼 oto tanabata no the jewels strung upon 

汗奈餓勢屢 unagaseru the string hung around 

多磨廼彌素磨屢廼 tama no misumaru no the neck of the Weaver Maiden 

阿奈陀磨波夜 anadama pa ya are very beautiful— 

This is the primary phonogram in Man’yōshū to represent na, used roughly 
1542 times (or nearly 30 times as often as 那). 

MYS 3 

八隅知之 YASUMISIsi In the morning when 

我大王乃 WA GA OPOKIMI no my great lord of the heavenly 

朝庭 ASITA NIPA eighty [rays of] sunshine 

取撫賜 TORINADE TAMAPI takes in his hand and strokes 

夕庭 YUPUPE NIPA the catalpa bow, 

伊縁立之 iYORI TATASIsi and in the evening stands 

御執乃 MITORASI no with the bow by his side— 

梓弓之 ADUZA YUMI NO I can heard the sound 

奈加弭乃 naka PAZU no made by the middle 

音為奈利 OTO SU nari of the arrow notch. 

朝猟尓 ASAGARI ni It seems that he now will 

今立須良思 IMA TATAsurasi head out for the morning hunt. 

暮猟尓 YUPUGARI ni It seems that he now will 

今他田渚良之 IMA taTAsurasi head out for the evening hunt. 

御執能 MITORASI no That weapon of his— 

梓弓之 ADUZA YUMI NO I can hear the sound 

奈加弭乃 naka PAZU no made by the middle 

音為奈里 OTO SU nari of the arrow notch. 

This phonogram is also used in the poetry of the Footprints of the Buddha 
sequence. 


BSS 4 

己乃美阿止 kono miato This divine footprint, 

夜与呂豆比賀利乎 yayorodu pikari wo may it emit 

波奈知伊太志 panati idasi 80,000 lights and 

毛呂毛呂須久比 moromoro sukupi save the masses 

和多志多麻波奈 watasitamapa na by ferrying them across. 

須久比多麻波奈 sukupitamapa na May it save everyone. 

This phonogram also appears in a poem preserved in the Atsuta daijingū engi. 

奈留美良乎 narumira wo How far it is 

美也禮波止保志 miyareba toposi looking out over Narumi. 

比多加知爾 pitakadi ni With this pure oar 

己乃由不志保爾 kono yupu sipo ni I will cross repeatedly 

和多良部牟加毛 wataraPYEmu kamo over this evening tide. 

The cursive form of this phonogram yields hiragana な, while taking the 
first two strokes from this phonogram produces katakana ナ. 

 

儺 


OJ: na OC: *nâi 

LH: nɑi EMC: nâ GO: na KN: da 

NOM: NA SV: na SK: na 

Usage / History: 

I place this phonogram in the LJS, though it is possible it was used earlier. 
This graph is used mainly in Nihon shoki in various songs and annotational notes, 
but it also is used in a place name, 儺県 Na [NO] AGATA, an ancient name for 
modern Hakata in Fukuoka City. This cannot belong to the CBS, as the Kan-on 
reading is da. 

This phonogram is used 12 times in annotational notes, and 47 times in 
poetry: 吾夫君、此云阿我儺勢 “ ‘My beloved lord.’ This is read aga nase” 
(NSG), 不須也凶目汚穢、此云伊儺之居梅枳枳多儺枳 “ ‘Refuse, hideous, 
and polluted,’ this is read ina sikomeki kitanaki” (NSG). 

NSK 83 

伊儺武斯盧 inamusiro The willow growing along 

呵簸泝比野儺擬 kapaswopi yanagwi the banks of the river bends 

寐逗愈凱麼 midu yukeba with the flow of the water. 

儺弭企於己陀智 nabiki okwitati Fluttering or standing tall 

曾能泥播宇世儒 sono ne pa usezu the roots remain unchanged. 

 

娜 


OJ: na OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: na GO: na KN: da 

NOM: na, nạ SV: nã SK: na 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, (if it was from the CBS it would be da), 
and appears sparingly in Nihon shoki, three times in annotational notes, and once 
in poetry: 大己貴、此云於褒婀娜武智 “ ‘The deity’s name 大己貴,’ this is 
read opo anamuti” (NSG), 高胸、此云多歌武娜娑歌 “ ‘High chest,’ this is 
read takamuna saka” (NSG), 喧響、此云淤等娜比 “ ‘Ring with noise,’ this is 
read otonapi” (NSG). 


NSK 115 

舸娜紀都該 kanakwi tuke The steed that I kept 

阿我柯賦古磨播 aga kapu kwoma pa bridled with hard wood 

比枳涅世儒 pikide sezu was never allowed outside. 

阿我柯賦古磨乎 aga kapu kwoma wo How has someone found 

比騰瀰都羅武箇 pito mituramu ka that steed that I nurtured? 

 

寧 


OJ: na OC: *nêŋ 

LH: neŋ EMC: nieŋ LMC: niajŋ GO: niyau KN: nei 

NOM: ninh SV: ninh SK: nyeng 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, as it appears that the Japanese heard 
this as nya. The only example of this as a phonogram is in the toponym 寧樂 
Nara(k). Examples in Man’yōshū include 寧樂宮 Nara Palace (MYS 78, 79), 
寧樂乃京尓者 nara no MIYAKWO ni PA ‘at the capital in Nara’ (MYS 80), and 
寧樂乃京師者 nara no MIYAKWO PA ‘the Nara Metropolis…’ (MYS 328). 

 

名 


OJ: na OC: *meŋ 

LH: mieŋ EMC: mjiäŋ GO: myau KN: mei 

NOM: danh, ranh SV: danh SK: myeng 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ na ‘name.’ The earliest datable example of 
this usage appears in the Taihō Census of 702, in personal names: 虫名 
MUSINA, 虫名賣 MUSINAmye, and 小虫名賣 WOMUSINAmye. Examples 
from mokkan excavated from the ruins of the Fujiwara Palace (fl. 694–710) 
include names or toponyms such as 猪名真 人 虫 麻 呂 WINA MABITO 
MUSImaro (MKK 13:13), and 名草郡 NAGUSA District (MK 1645). One 
example, 多遅比日名 Tadipi PINA, is dated Second month, seventh day, 708 
(MK 1102). 

There are many examples of this kungana in Kojiki, but these are all confined 
to the first volume of the book: 天之眞名井 AME NO MANAWI ‘the Mana well 
of heaven’ (KG), 手名椎 TENADUTI ‘(her name was) Tenazuchi’ (KG), and 
櫛名田比賣 KUSINADA pimye ‘Princess Kushinada’ (KG). This same type of 
usage also appears in Nihon shoki, a t otal o f 8 3 t imes a ccording t o Ō no 
(1977:803): 伊豫二名洲 Iyo [NO] PUTANA SIMA ‘Futana Island of Iyo’ (NSG), 
來名戸 KUNATWO ‘the deity Kunato’ (NSG), and 天眞名井 AME AME [NO] 
MANAWI (NSG). 

This kungana is very popular in Man’yōshū, appearing over 200 times in the 
anthology. 

MYS 10 

君之齒母 KIMI GA YO mo Let us tie together 

吾代毛所知哉 WA GA YO mo SIRU YA the grass on the hills 

磐代乃 IPASIRO no of Iwashiro which has power 

岡之草根乎 WOKA NO KUSANE wo over the life of the ruler 

去来結手名 IZA MUSUBITE NA as well as my own. 

 


魚 


OJ: na OC: *ŋa 

LH: ŋɨɑ EMC: ŋjwo GO: go KN: gyo 

NOM: ngư, ngơ SV: ngư SK: e 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ na ‘fish.’ The modern word, sakana, 
is usually interpreted as saka-na ‘rice wine-greens.’ The Old Japanese word for 
fish is uwo. Consider, however, the following note from Nihon shoki: 魚、此云 
儺 “ ‘Fish,’ this is read na” (NSG). 

In the Yamashiro census from 726 is the name 大魚, which is usually read 
OPONA (cf. Ōno 1977:77). The earliest datable example of this graph appears on 
a mokkan which contains the date of the fourth month, 709. This fragment 
contains what appears to be a name: 久己利魚 KukoriNA. 

This phonogram also appears once in Kojiki: 縻魚簀 MaNASU (KG). 
There is also one example in Nihon shoki: 八釣魚 YATURINA, and the early 
editor added a note saying that 魚 is to be read na (NSG). There are five 
examples of this semantogram in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2190 

吾門之 WA GA KADWO NO The miscanthus at the gate 

淺茅色就 ASADI IRODUKU of my house is in full color. 

吉魚張能 YONABARI no It seems that the autumn leaves 

浪柴乃野之 NAMISIBA no NWO NO of the trees on Namishiba Plain 

黄葉散良新 MOMIDI TIRUrasi in Yonabari are scattering. 

 

中 


OJ: na OC: *truŋ 

LH: ṭuŋ EMC: tjuŋ GO: tiu KN: tiu 

NOM: trung, truông SV: trung, trúng, trọng SK: cyung 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to the mind of the reader OJ naka ‘inside,’ but Nihon 
shoki contains this interesting note: 于 三 國 坂中井 中 、 此 云 那 “…to 
SAKANAWI of MIKUNI… ‘Inside,’ this is read na.” 

 

菜 


OJ: na OC: *tshə̂ h 

LH: tshəh EMC: tshậih GO: sai KN: sai 

NOM: NA SV: thái SK: choy 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ na ‘side dish, vegetables.’ This usage only 
appears in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 8 

熟田津尓 NIKITATU ni When I was about to board 

船乗世武登 PUNANORAsemu to a ship at Nikita Port, waiting 

月待者 TUKWI MATEBA for the moon, the tide came in 

潮毛可奈比沼 SIPO mo kanapiNU allowing us to depart. 

今者許藝乞菜 IMA PA kogiIDE NA Shall we not row out presently? 

 

七 


OJ: na OC: *tshit 

LH: tshit EMC: tshjet GO: siti KN: situ 

NOM: thất SV: thất SK: chil 


Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ na of nana ‘seven.’ It occurs five 
times in Man’yōshū, four of those times to represent part of naku ni ‘do not.’ 

MYS 506 

吾背子波 WA GA SEKWO pa My beloved, 

物莫念 MONO NA OMOPI SO do not worry about things. 

事之有者 KOTO si ARABA If something were to happen 

火尓毛水尓母 PWI nimo MIDU nimo do you not have me who would 

吾莫七國 WA GA NAKENAKU NI go through both fire and water? 

 

莫 


OJ: na OC: *mâkh 

LH: mah EMC: muoh GO: maku 

NOM: mạc SV: mạc SK: mwo, mak, moyk 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ na when it appears as a negative 
imperative na…so ‘do not do X.’ This usage appears in Man’yōshū five times. 

MYS 1167 

朝入為等 ASARI SU to I wonder who is 

礒尓吾見之 ISWO ni WA GA MIsi harvesting the gulfweed 

莫告藻乎 NANORISO wo that I saw 

誰嶋之 IDURE NO SIMA NO as I fished from 

白水郎可将苅 AMA ka KARIKYEMU the rocky shore. 

 

嚢 


OJ: nagi OC: *nâŋ 

LH: naŋ EMC: nâŋ GO: nau KN: dau 

NOM: nang SV: nang SK: nang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, appearing in a toponym Harima fudoki, 
in the toponym 美嚢郡 Minagi District. Wamyōshō later represents this as 美 
奈木 minaKWI. 

 

諾 


OJ: naki OC: *nâk 

LH: nak EMC: nâk GO: naku KN: daku 

NOM: nặc SV: nặc SK: nak 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only in Nihon shoki, in the 
name of the male creation deity: 伊奘諾 Izanaki. This name is generally 
pronounced as Izanagi, but consider that based on a note in Shiki, which 
represents the pronunciation of the name as 去来鳴 IZA-NAKI, this originally 
was pronounced as ki and not gi in Nihon shoki. 

 

南 


OJ: name, nami, namu OC: *nə̂ m 

LH: nəm EMC: nậm GO: namu KN: dan 

NOM: nam SV: nam SK: nam 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in a variety of records with a 
variety of readings. The earliest I can find is in documents preserved in Shōsōin: 


印南 Inami, and 甘南備 Kamunabwi. A wooden document excavated from the 
Nara Capital ruins contains part of a name 正六位上甘南備真人 Kamunabwi 
MABITO of the Senior Sixth Rank Upper (MK 4209). A fragment of Yamashiro 
fudoki has: 雙栗社、風土記 南群社 “Namiguri Shrine. Fudoki makes this 
Namiguri Shrine.” 

Izumo fudoki has 南佐 Namesa. This reading is supported by the following 
explanation found in fudoki: 故云南佐神龜三年改字滑狹 “Thus it is called Namesa. 
In the third year of Jinki (726 CE) the characters were altered to NAMESA.” 

The usage of 甘南備 Kamunabwi appears to have been chosen, because the 
nasal final of 南 provided the prenasalization of the final -bwi < -npwi. 

This phonogram was also quite popular in Man’yōshū to represent namu. 

MYS 997 

住吉乃 SUMINOYE no Like the corbicula on 

粉濱之四時美 KWOPAMA NO sizimi Kohama Beach of Suminoe, 

開藻不見 AKE MO MIZU will I continue to yearn 

隠耳哉 KOMORITE NOMWI YA only in secret without 

戀度南 KWOPWI WATARInamu even opening up to you? 

 

冉 


OJ: nami OC: *namʔ 

LH: ńamʔ EMC: ńźjämʔ GO: nemu KN: zemu 

NOM: nhiệm SV: nhiễm SK: ngyem 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram is only found in one 
name in Nihon shoki. It is tempting to back-date this phonogram even further 
because of the vocalism, as Go-on has a front mid vowel, and earlier states of 
Chinese have a lower vowel. However, as the Late Middle Chinese as 
reconstructed by Pulleyblank is riam, it possible that the scribes kept the later 
vowel, uncoalesced (separating /i/ from /a/), but used the earlier nasal. This graph 
appears in the name of the female creation deity: 伊奘冉 Izanami (NSG). 

 

尼 


OJ: ne OC: *nri or *ni 

LH: ṇi or neih EMC: nri GO: ni KN: di 

NOM: ni, nơi, này SV: ni, nậc, nật SK: ni, nil 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. The earliest known example of this 
graph appears on the Inariyama tumulus sword inscription (tentatively dated 471 
or 531): 多加利足尼 *Ta-ka-ri Swok-ne. Likely *swok-ne underwent vowel 
raising to become the later title of sukune. 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki: There the name 慕尼夫人 
Mone PASIKASI appears. Another usage appears in the record of Kinmei, this one a 
toponym: 尼彌方也地名未詳 “[This] is Nemi District, but nothing else is clear.” 

This phonogram also appears in the Suiko era corpus. Jōgū Shōtoku teisetsu 
also contains the same usage as noted above: 宗我稲目足尼 Swoga INAME 
Sukune (represented in Jōgū as 巷奇大臣名伊奈米足尼 Great Minister SWOga, 
named Iname Sukune). There is also the name 乎阿尼命 Woane [NO] MIKOTO. 
This phonogram appears on several mokkan: 佐々宜多尼一升 sasagetane PITO 
MASU ‘one quarter of a peck of black-eyed pea seeds’ (unnumbered tablet). 


This graph appears once in Kojiki: 金云加尼 ‘Metal’ is read kane (KG). 
There is also only one example in Nihon shoki: 川原連加尼 KAPAPARA MURAZI 
Kane (NSG). This phonogram also appears on a few wooden documents 
excavated from the ancient Fujiwara Palace grounds (fl. 694–710). One such 
example is: 神門評阿尼里 Ane Village of KAMUDWO District (MKK 5:85). 
Izumo fudoki mentions there is the Ane Shrine (阿如社) in the Kamudo District. 

Man’yōshū also preserves ten examples of this phonogram. 

MYS 4389 

志保不尼乃 sipopune no Like the whitecaps that 

弊古祖志良奈美 pye kwoswo siranami suddenly crash over the bow 

尓波志久母 nipasiku mo of the tide-ship, 

於不世他麻保加 opusetamapo ka I was suddenly called away, 

於母波弊奈久尓 omopapyenaku ni though I had not expected it. 

 

禰 


OJ: ne OC: *nêʔ 

LH: neʔ EMC: nieiʔ GO: nei KN: dei 

NOM: né, nẽ SV: nễ SK: nyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It appears in the Suiko era corpus, in 
Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu, with 蘇我伊奈米宿禰 Swoga Iname Sukune. This 
provides an example of a newer rendition, where 足尼 is older, appearing on the 
Inariyama tumulus sword inscription, which may date from 417 or 531. 

The earliest datable example of this graph is from the Taihō Census (702), 
found in the name: 矢集宿禰宿奈麻呂 YADUMYE Sukune Sukunamaro. This 
phonogram appears three times in the liturgies: 倭國乃六御縣能刀禰男女爾至 
万弖 YAMATO [NO] KUNI no MUTU [NO] MIAGATA no twone, WOTOKWO WOMINA ni 
ITARU made “…and down to the leaders of the six august districts and men and 
women of Yamato Province…” (NT 3). This phonogram appears on a variety of 
mokkan, written in an abbreviated style: 矢田部祢麻呂 YATABYE Nemaro (MK 
2178), 長門国美祢郡 NAGATWO Province Mine District (MKK 12:21–22). 

In Kojiki 禰 is the main graph used to transcribe ne, but never in the poetry. 
It is found almost exclusively in the title sukune: 志夫美宿禰王 Prince Sibumi 
Sukune (KG), but there is also the example of 沙禰王 Prince Sane (KG). 

This phonogram is used once in an annotational note and 15 times in the 
poetry in Nihon shoki: 畝傍山、此云宇禰縻夜摩 “ ‘Mount Unebi,’ this is read 
unebwi yama” (NSG). 

NSK 3 

阿磨佐箇屢 amasakaru Having crossed over 

避奈菟謎廼 pinatu mye no the narrow, earthly straits, 

以和多邏素西渡 iwatarasu setwo the provincial maidens 

以嗣箇播箇柁輔智 isikapa kataputi stand on the banks of the river 

箇多輔智爾 kataputi ni on the banks of the Ishikawa, 

阿彌播利和柁嗣 ami pariwatasi spreading out their nets. 

妹慮豫嗣爾 mero yosi ni Pull in those nets 

豫嗣豫利據禰 yosi yorikone by pulling on the meshes! 

以嗣箇播箇柁輔智 isikapa kataputi On the banks of the Ishikawa. 

 


This is the primary phonogram to represent ne in Man’yōshū. The following 
chōka has five instances of this phonogram. 

MYS 804 

等伎能佐迦利乎 toki no sakari wo Unable to hang on to 

等々尾迦禰 todomwikane the best of those times, 

周具斯野利都礼 sugusiyariture time has marched on. 

美奈乃和多 mina no wata Upon this black hair, 

迦具漏伎可美尓 kagurwoki kami ni black as the guts of the snail, 

伊都乃麻可 itu no ma ka frost has lighted 

斯毛乃布利家武 simwo no purikyemu without my knowing it. 

久礼奈為能 kurenawi no Upon this crimson face 

意母提乃宇倍尓 omote no upe ni wrinkles have come 

伊豆久由可 iduku yu ka to visit me 

斯和何伎多利斯 siwa ga kitarisi from somewhere. 

麻周羅遠乃 masurawo no When a valiant one 

遠刀古佐備周等 wotwokwo sabwisu to behaves like a man 

都流伎多智 turugitati he would gird his waist 

許志尓刀利波枳 kosi ni tworipaki with a sword and a knife, 

佐都由美乎 satuyumi wo take his hunting bow 

多尓伎利物知提 tanigimotite in his hand, 

阿迦胡麻尓 akagwoma ni and throw his striped cloth 

志都久良宇知意伎 situkura utioki on the red colt, 

波比能利提 papinorite saddle up, and dash off 

阿蘇比阿留伎斯 aswobi aru kisi for the hunt. 

余乃奈迦野 yo no naka ya Has that kind of world 

都禰尓阿利家留 tune ni arikyeru continued without change? 

遠等咩良何 wotomyera ga Young men push open 

佐那周伊多斗乎 sanasu itatwo wo wooden doors to the rooms 

意斯比良伎 osipiraki where the young maidens sleep, 

伊多度利与利提 itadworiyorite and groping toward them 

麻多麻提乃 matamade no wrap their jewel-like arms 

多麻提佐斯迦閇 tamade sasikape in their own, but the number 

佐禰斯欲能 sanesi ywo no of nights they spend together 

伊久陀母阿羅禰婆 ikuda mo araneba are few in number, 

多都可豆恵 tatu kaduwe so with a cane 

許志尓多何禰提 kosi ni taganete provided by their waist, 

可由既婆 ka yukeba when they go that way 

比等尓伊等波延 pito ni itopaye they are begrudged by people; 

可久由既婆 kaku yukeba when they go this way 

比等尓邇久麻延 pito ni nikumaye they are hated by people. 

意余斯遠波 oyosi wo pa It seems that this is how 

迦久能尾奈良志 kaku nomwi narasi it is with elderly men. 

多麻枳波流 tamakiparu To the extent of the spirit— 

伊能知遠志家騰 inoti wosikyedo life is precious, 

世武周弊母奈新 semu subye mo nasi but there is nothing one can do. 


泥 


OJ: ne OC: *nîʔ or *nîh 

LH: neiʔ, neih EMC: nieiʔ, nieih GO: nei KN: dei 

NOM: nê, nề, nễ, nè SV: nê, nệ SK: ni 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The earliest datable example comes 
from the Chikuzen Census of 702: 大神部泥麻呂 OPOKAMWIBYE Nemaro, 物 
部泥婆賣 MONONOBYE Nebamye, and 大家部泥豆賣 OPOYABYE Netumye. 
The graph also appears in a mokkan excavated from the ruins of the Fujiwara 
Palace (fl. 694–710), which contains a fragment of a name: 首泥麻 OBITO 
Nema (unnumbered tablet). 

This phonogram is also the main graph used to transcribe ne in the poetry of 
Kojiki: 

KK 19 

阿斯波良能 asipara no In the dirty little hut 

志祁志岐袁夜迩 sikyesiki woya ni on the reed plain 

須賀多多美 sugatatami we cleaned and 

伊夜佐夜斯岐弖 iya sayasikite spread out sedge mats, 

和賀布多理泥斯 wa ga putari nesi and the two of us slept together. 

Nihon shoki also preserves one example of this phonogram in an annotational 
note, and 18 in the poetry. The majority of occurrences of this graph are to 
transcribe di, but I have found the following: 朱花、此云波泥孺 ” ‘crimsoncolored,’ 
this is read panezu”(NSG). 

NSK 58 

菟藝泥赴 tuginepu This woman of 

夜莽之呂謎能 yamasiromye no Yamashiro, thick with trees, 

許玖波茂知 kokupa moti dug up a large radish 

于智辭於朋泥 utisi opone with a wooden hoe. 

泥士漏能 nezirwo no Those arms of hers, 

辭漏多娜武枳 sirwotadamuki white like the large radish— 

摩箇儒鷄麼虚曾 makazukyeba koso you could say you knew me not 

辭羅儒等茂伊波梅 sirazu tomo ipame if we had never lay intertwined. 

The average kanji dictionary in Japan has the Go-on as nai for this 
phonogram, but all the manuscripts of Hokekyō ongi have tei, aside from one 
which has nii (ニイ). Clearly the reading tei is based on Kan-on, and it is fairly 
certain that the Go-on was nei. 

 

埿 


OJ: ne OC: *nîʔ or *nîh 

LH: neiʔ, neih EMC: nieiʔ, nieih GO: nei KN: dei 

NOM: NA SV: NA SK: ni 

Usage / History: 

This is a variant phonogram of 泥, and only appears twice in Nihon shoki 
according to Mori (1991:232), but the textual work of Ienaga et al. (1986.1:451) 
shows that the manuscripts agree the original graph was 泥. The Go-on reading 
is based on the same reasoning as 泥 above, as the textual data from Hokekyō 
ongi are exactly the same, down to the same manuscript. 

Ōno (1977:574) notes that there is one case of this phonogram, in MYS 1576. 


MYS 1576 

此岳尓 KONO WOKA ni In order to get 

小壮鹿履起 WOSIKA PUMIOKOSI a shot at the buck we 

宇加埿良比 ukanerapi have driven them on this hill— 

可聞可聞為良久 kamokamo SUraku it is up to you, my lord, 

君故尓許曽 KIMI YUWE ni koso to do whatever it takes. 

 

年 


OJ: ne OC: *nîn 

LH: nen EMC: nien GO: nemu KN: den 

NOM: nên SV: niên SK: nyen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears four times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 62 

在根良 ARINE YOSI In the middle of the sea 

對馬乃渡 tusima no WATARI in the channel of Tsushima 

渡中尓 WATANAKA ni rich in rough rocks, 

幣取向而 NUSA TORIMUKETE we hold up our soft offerings— 

早還許年 PAYA KAPYERIkone hurry and return home to us. 

 

涅 


OJ: ne OC: *nît 

LH: net EMC: niet GO: neti KN: detu 

NOM: nét, nít, nớt, nứt SV: nát, niết SK: nyel, nal 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only once in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 79 

耶麼能謎能 yamanobye no I have no regrets 

故思麼古喩衞爾 kwosimakwo yuwe ni parting with my prized 

比登涅羅賦 pito nerapu eight horses people are eyeing— 

宇麼能耶都擬播 uma no yatugwi pa all because of the woman, 

嗚思稽矩謀那斯 wosikyeku mo nasi Yamanobe Koshimako. 

There is also the theory that this phonogram should be read with its Kan-on 
reading, as derapu ‘to show off,’ based on the word terapu ‘to let someone see, 
to show off.’ It seems likely that the prenasalization would come from the elision 
of a subject marker no (pito no terapu > pito nderapu), but I only know of cases 
where the subject marker is either present or absent, but I know of none where an 
eliding subject marker leaves a trace. For the time being, I leave this as is. 

 

根 


OJ: ne OC: *kə̂ n 

LH: kən EMC: kən GO: komu KN: kon 

NOM: căn, cỗi SV: căn SK: kun 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ ne ‘root,’ and first appears in the 
Taihō Census of 702 in names such as 石根 ISINE, 阿根賣 aNEmye, and 根 
都賣 NEtumye. 

This kungana is also found throughout Kojiki and Nihon shoki. Examples 
from Kojiki include 天津日子根 AMATU PIKWONE (KG), 底津石根 SOKOTU 
IPANE (KG). 


Examples from Nihon shoki are: 埿土根 UPIDINE (NSG), 根裂神 the 
deity NESAKU (NSG), 天津彦根 AMATU PIKWONE (NSG), and 正哉吾勝勝 
速日天忍穗根 MASAKA AKATU KATIPAYAPI AMA [NO] OSIPONE (NSG). 

There are roughly 36 examples of this in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 123 

多氣婆奴礼 takyeba nure The locks of my beloved, 

多香根者長寸 taKANEBA NAGAKI pinned up, they come undone. 

妹之髪 IMWO GA KAMI Left as is, they are long. 

此来不見尓 KONO KORO MINU ni Having not seen her I wonder 

掻入津良武香 KAKIRETUramu KA if she has combed them? 

 

嶺 


OJ: ne OC: *rêŋʔ 

LH: lieŋʔ EMC: ljäŋʔ GO: riyau KN: rei 

NOM: NA SV: lĩnh SK: lyeng 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ ne ‘mountain peak,’ based on an 
analysis, perhaps of OJ mine, where mi was analyzed as an honorific prefix. This 
usage only appears in Man’yōshū, and I have only found one example in the 
following. 

MYS 3314 

次嶺經 TUGINEPU A stranger’s spouse 

山背道乎 YAMASIRODI wo rides a horse down 

人都末乃 PITOduma no the Yamashiro Road 

馬従行尓 UMA YORI YUKU ni of recurring mountain peaks, 

己夫之 ONODUMAsi but as my own spouse 

歩従行者 KATI YORI YUKEBA walks the road on foot, 

毎見 MIRU GOTO NI every time I see him 

哭耳之所泣 NE NOMWIsi NAKAYU a cry naturally comes forth. 

 

念 


OJ: nemu OC: *nîms 

LH: nemh EMC: niemh GO: nemu KN: demu 

NOM: niệm. niềm SV: niệm SK: nyem 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears but once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 735 

春日山 KASUGA YAMA Haze lingers 

霞多奈引 KASUMI tanaBIKI on Mount Kasuga, 

情具久 KOKOROguku and the hazy moon 

照月夜尓 TERERU TUKUYWO ni shines half-heartedly. 

獨鴨念 PITORI KAMO nemu Will I sleep alone? 

 

爾 


OJ: ni < ne OC: *neʔ 

LH: ńeʔ EMC: ńźjeʔ GO: ni KN: zi 

NOM: nĩ SV: nhĩ SK: i 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in the apparent royal title of 
爾支 *ne-ke, which I have postulated means ‘root-king.’ This graph also appears 
on the 蔚州 Silla in the name: 爾利夫智 *Ne-ri-pu-te. 

This graph also appears in Nihon shoki from quotes of Paekche records: 爾 
波 移 Ne-pa-ya-i, 久爾辛 Ku-ne-sin, 爾林 Ne-lim, 古爾解 Kɔ-ne-kɛ. 
Because of vowel raising in Japanese *ne raised to ni. The graph is often 
abbreviated to 尓. 

This phonogram appears in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu in the following 
names: 名阿米久尓意斯波留支比里尓波乃弥己等 “His name is Ame Kuni 
Osiparuki Piro no mikoto.” This phonogram appears often in the liturgies: 皇神 
等前爾白久 SUME KAMWITATI [NO] MAPYE ni MAWOSAku “and declare before the 
imperial deities…” (NT 14). This phonogram appears on a variety of mokkan: 尓 
良之布 nira NO NUNO ‘type of cloth’ (MK 2608), 和尓部臣牟良…和尓部安倍 
WaniBYE OMI Mura…WaniBYE Abe (MK 318), 玉尓有皮手尓麻伎母知而伊 
□・□□皮伊加尓加 TAMA ni ARU pa TE ni makimotiTE iX…XX pa ikani ka… 
“As for what is on the jewels, wrap them around your wrist…why…?” (MKK 
10:90). 

This phonogram also is used often in Kojiki, though 邇 is more prevalent. 
Examples from Kojiki include: 建波爾安王 Prince TAKYE Pani YASU (KG), 
和爾吉師 Wani Kisi (KG), and 布斗麻邇爾 putwo mani ni ‘by great 
divination’ (KG). 

KK 28 

多迦比迦流 taka pikaru The august son of the sun 

比能美古 pi no mikwo which shines high above, 

夜須美斯志 yasumisisi my great lord 

和賀意富岐美 wa ga opokimi of the heavenly eight rays— 

阿良多麻能 aratama no as the year comes and goes 

登斯賀岐布禮婆 tosi ga kipureba like a rough gem, 

阿良多麻能 aratama no the months come and go 

都紀波岐閇由久 tukwi pa kipeyuku like a rough gem, 

宇倍那宇倍那 ube na ube na Indeed it is! Indeed it is! 

岐美麻知賀多爾 kimi matigata ni Unable to wait for you 

和賀祁勢流 wa ga kyeseru will not the moon rise 

意須比能須蘇爾 osupi no suswo ni and shine on the hem of 

都紀多多那牟余 tukwi tatanamu yo the outer robe I am wearing? 

Nihon shoki contains this phonogram in eight annotational notes, and it 
appears 29 times in poetry: 葉木國、此云播擧矩爾 “ ‘Land of tree leaves,’ this 
is read pako kuni” (KG), 太占、此云布刀磨爾 “ ‘great divination,’ this is read 
putwo mani” (KG), 轠轤然、此云乎謀苦留留爾 “ ‘the jewel necklace will 
have no end,’ this is read wo mo kururu ni” (KG). 

NSK 104 

斯那提流 sinateru Starving for want of food 

箇多烏箇夜摩爾 katawokayama ni on Mount Kataoka, 

伊比爾惠弖 ipi ni wete the shining hill, 

許夜勢屢 koyaseru how pitiful is that farmer 

諸能多比等阿波禮 sono tapito apare who has fallen. 


於夜那斯爾 oya nasi ni Surely you were not 

那禮奈理雞迷夜 nare narikyeme ya raised without parents. 

佐須陀氣能 sasu take no Do you have no lord, 

枳彌波夜那祇 kimi paya naki strong like bamboo? 

伊比爾惠弖 ipi ni wete Starving for want of food 

許夜勢留 koyaseru how pitiful is that farmer 

諸能多比等阿波禮 sono tapito apare who has fallen. 

This phonogram is the principal graph used to represent ni in Man’yōshū, 
appearing approximately 4017 times, which works out to be about 200 times per 
book, and this is one of the few phonograms to be consistently used throughout 
the entire anthology. 

MYS 795 

伊弊爾由伎弖 ipye ni yukite What am I to do once 

伊可爾可阿我世武 ika ni ka a ga semu I have returned to my home? 

摩久良豆久 makuraduku Likely I will have lonely 

都摩夜左夫斯久 tumaya sabusiku thoughts of our sleeping hut 

於母保由倍斯母 omopoyu besi mo where our pillows touch. 

This is the only phonogram used in the Footprints of the Buddha poetic 
sequence. 

BSS 6 

麻須良乎乃 masurawo no As we gaze at the trodden 

須々美佐岐多知 susumi sakitati footprints of the captain 

布賣留阿止乎 pumyeru ato wo who had gone on ahead 

美都々志乃波牟 mitutu sinopamu we will yearn for him; 

多太爾阿布麻弖爾 tada ni apu made ni until we meet him directly; 

麻佐爾阿布麻弖爾 masa ni apu made ni until we truly meet him. 

 

貳 


OJ: ni OC: *nis 

LH: ńis EMC: ńźih GO: ni KN: zi 

NOM: nhì, nhẹ SV: nhị SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in place names recorded in 
Nihon shoki. The following is illustrative: 斯二岐旱岐 seniki kanki ‘princes of 
Seniki.’ In general this phonogram and its simplified form were avoided, because 
of the semantics, ‘two.’ 

This phonogram also appears in three annotational notes and twice in one 
song: 覓國、此云矩貳磨儀 “ ‘View the land,’ this is read kuni magi” (NSG), 
顯露、此云阿羅播貳 “ ‘Be visible,’ this is read arapa ni” (NSG), 齋庭、此云 
踰貳波 “ ‘Sacred yard,’ this is read yunipa” (NSG). 

NSK 69 

阿資臂紀能 asipikwi no Weary from climbing 

椰摩娜烏菟勾利 yamada wo tukuri I cultivated mountain land. 

椰摩娜箇彌 yamadakami The mountain being high, 

斯哆媚烏和之勢 sitabwi wo wasise I buried irrigation pipes. 

志哆那企貳 sita naki ni Thus I cry to myself. 

和餓儺勾菟摩 wa ga naku tuma I weep for my spouse— 

箇哆儺企貳 kata naki ni and I whimper. 


和餓儺勾菟摩 wa ga naku tuma I cry for my spouse. 

去鐏去會 kozo koso It was last night 

椰主區泮娜布例 yasuku pada pure that our flesh calmly touched. 

This phonogram appears over 300 times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 22 

河上乃 KAPA NO PE no On the sacred cluster of 

湯津盤村二 YUTU IPAMURA ni boulders upriver grass 

草武左受 KUSA musazu does not grow. I wish they 

常丹毛冀名 TUNE NImo GAMO NA could forever remain thus. 

常處女煮手 TUNE WOTOMYE NITE Forever like a young maiden. 

 

二 


OJ: ni OC: *nis 

LH: ńis EMC: ńźih GO: ni KN: zi 

NOM: nhì, nhẹ SV: nhị SK: i 

Usage / History: 

See the explanation under the character 貳. 

 

仁 


OJ: ni, nini OC: *nin 

LH: ńin EMC: ńźjen GO: nimu KN: zin 

NOM: nhân SV: nhân SK: in 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in the well known name 王 
仁 Wani, who legend claims was sent from Paekche to educate the Yamato 
Court in Chinese writing and literature. It is difficult to date this usage, because 
Kojiki writes the name 和迩吉師 wa-ni kisi. There is also one example of this 
as nini in Kojiki: 番仁岐命 Po [NO] Ninigi, the imperial deity, the grandson of 
the Sun Goddess. 

Nihon shoki also contains the names of people from Paekche: one a vice 
envoy named 東部恩率調信仁 Teu-si-ni of the third rank from the eastern 
quarter, and another 鎭將劉仁願 Occupying Commander Riu-ni-guwen, and 
侍醫百濟人億仁 Attending Pharmicist, a person from Paekche, (named) Oku-ni. 
This phonogram appears three times in the liturgies: 皇神等能広前仁白久 
SUMEGAMWITATI no PIROMAPYE ni MAWOSAku ‘I declare before the broad 
audience of the imperial deitieis…’ (NT 2). 

This phonogram appears on mokkan to transcribe the following names or 
toponyms: 備前国上道郡居都郷和仁部太都万呂 BIZEN [NO] KUNI UPAMITI 
District Kotu Village WaniBYE Tatumaro (MKK 4:12), and 出雲国仁多郡 
IDUMWO [NO] KUNI Nita District (MKK 20:14). The second example contains the 
date 757. There is also a mokkan with the following fragment of a poem: 奈仁波 
都□佐久夜 nanipa tu (ni?) saku ya ‘At the ferry of Naniwa, (those blossoms 
that) are in bloom…’ (MKK 30:194). 

The phonogram appears in Man’yōshū over 50 times. 

MYS 3740 

安米都知能 ametuti no Certainly if there 

可未奈伎毛能尓 kamwi naki mono ni were nothing as the deities 

安良婆許曽 araba koso of heaven and earth 


安我毛布伊毛尓 a ga mopu imwo ni then I would die without 

安波受思仁世米 apazu siniseme meeting the beloved I think of. 

 

邇 


OJ: ni OC: *neʔ 

LH: ńeʔ EMC: ńźjeʔ GO: ni KN: zi 

NOM: NA SV: nhĩ SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The earliest datable example appears in 
the Buzen Census (702), in the name 秦部阿迩 PATABYE Ani. It also appears 
on mokkan, transcribing 宇邇 uni ‘sea urchin,’ and 石見国邇摩 IPAMI [NO] 
KUNI Nima (District). This phonogram appears a few times on mokkan: □国迩 
摩郡 X Province Nima District (unnumbered tablet), 津迩郷 TUni Village 
(MK 181), where 迩 is an abbreviated graph of 邇. 

This phonogram is also popular in Kojiki, appear in examples such as: 宇比 
地迩神 the deity Upidini (KG), 次妹須比智迩神 and his sister, the deity 
Supitini (KG), 久美度迩 kumidwo ni ‘at the wondrous door’ (KG). 

KK 29 

袁波理迩 wopari ni Directly across 

多陀迩牟迦幣流 tada ni mukapyeru from Owari— 

袁都能佐岐那流 wotu no saki naru there a lone pine 

比登都麻都 pitotu matu tree on the Cape of Otsu. 

This phonogram is used sparingly in Nihon shoki, appearing once in an 
annotational note, and four times in the poetry: 汝妹、此云儺迩毛 “ ‘Your 
beloved,’ this is read nanimwo” (NSG). 

NSK 66 

佐瑳羅餓多 sasaragata Undo the string with 

迩之枳能臂毛弘 nisiki no pimwo wo the bamboo whisk design— 

等枳舎気帝 tokisakete that brocade string. 

阿麻多絆泥受迩 amata pa nezu ni I cannot spend many nights; 

多儾比等用能未 tada pito ywo nomwi let us spend but one night. 

This phonogram appears roughly 11 times in Man’yōshū (depending on the 
manuscript): 

MYS 215 

衾路 PUSUMADI NO I left my beloved 

引出山 PIKIDE NO YAMA NI in the mountains of Hikide 

妹置 IMWO WO OKITE along the road of Fusuma. 

山路念邇 YAMADI OMOPU ni I have no energy to live, 

生刀毛無 IKERU two mo NASI thinking about that road. 

 

尼 


OJ: ni OC: *nri or *nîh 

LH: ṇi, neih EMC: ṇi, nieih LMC: nri GO: ni KN: di, diti 

NOM: ni, nơi, này SV: ni, nậc, nật SK: ni, nil 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. As it appears in the Nihon shoki, it 
seems clear that the earlier reading of n- was used, since the LMC would require 
di, and there are examples of this in Shoki. This phonogram is used three times in 


annotational notes, and four times in poetry: 和幣、此云尼枳底 “ ‘Soft 
offerings’ (NSG), this is read nikite.” 比丘尼 bikuni “nun” (NSG). 

NSK 128 

阿箇悟馬能 akagwoma no The red horse hestitates 

以喩企波々箇屢 iyuki pabakaru to move toward 

麻矩儒播羅 makuzupara the true vine field. 

奈爾能都底擧騰 nani no tute koto Why send a message when you 

多頴尼之曳鶏武 tadanisiyekyemu can just say it directly? 

There is also a curious word, reportedly of Silla origin: 久須尼自利 
kusuniziri (< *kusoniziri), but the meaning is not clear. From simple context, it 
would appear to be some type of lament. 

This graph also appears in Man’yōshū, but only twice in the same poem, 
once to represent ni and once as ne. 

MYS 1694 

細比礼乃 TAKUpire no White azaleas on 

鷺坂山 SAGISAKA YAMA NO Mount Sagisaka, 

白管自 SIRATUTUzi like a hempen scarf— 

吾爾尼保波尼 WARE ni nipopane Stain me with your brilliance; 

妹爾示 IMWO ni SIMYESAMU I will show it to my beloved. 

 

日 


OJ: ni OC: *nit 

LH: ńit EMC: ńźjet GO: niti KN: zitu 

NOM: nhật, nhựt SV: nhật, nhựt SK: il 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, appearing in a Nara era document, 
written in the name 日富郡 Nipo District. This phonogram usage is very rare, as 
it was used more often as a kungana to transcribe pi (which see). 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, the majority of the time to 
represent pi, however, there is one example, MYS 87 where the poem ends with 
万代日 made ni until….’ Ōno (1962:470–471) has argued that 日 in this poem 
is actually a mistake for 尓; however, there is continuity among the textual 
witnesses, so regardless that other poems may contain the phrase 万代爾 made 
ni, that does not prove that MYS 87 should also. Thus: 

MYS 87 

在管裳 ARITUTU MO I shall continue 

君乎者将待 KIMI woBA MATAMU to wait for you like this— 

打靡 UTINABIKU until frost lights 

吾黒髪尓 WA GA KURWOKAMI ni upon my black hair 

霜乃置萬代日 SIMWO no OKU made ni that flutters in the wind. 

 

而 


OJ: ni OC: *nə 

LH: ńə > ńɨ EMC: ńźɨ GO: ni KN: zi 

NOM: nhí SV: nhi SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This rather rare usage belongs to the LJS. This usage appears only in the first 
three books of Nihon shoki, twice in annotational notes and four times in two 
songs: 妍哉、此云阿那而惠夜 “ ‘How delightful,’ this is read ana ni weya” 


(NSG), 立於浮渚在平處、此云羽企爾磨梨陀毘邏而陀陀志 “ ‘There is a 
floating island, and they descend on the flat land and stand upon it,’ this is read 
ukizima (a)ri tapira ni tatasi” (NSG). 

NSK 9 

於佐箇廼 osaka no Though there are many 

於朋務露夜珥 opomurwoya ni who have come and entered 

比苔瑳破而 pito sapa ni the great cavern of Osaka, 

異離烏利苔毛 iriwori tomo and though many men 

比苔瑳破而 pito sapa ni have entered here 

枳伊離烏利苔毛 ki iriwori tomo and are seated before us, 

瀰都瀰都志 mitumitusi you, the intrepid 

倶梅能固邏餓 kume no kwora ga sons of the Kume, 

勾鶩都々伊 kubututui with pommel-head hilts, 

異志都々伊毛智 isitutui moti holding your stone-head swords, 

于智弖之夜莽務 utitesi yamamu will now smite the enemy. 

 

耳 


OJ: ni OC: *nəʔ 

LH: ńəʔ > ńɨʔ EMC: ńźɨʔ GO: ni KN: zi 

NOM: nhĩ SV: nhĩ SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram only appears in 
Man’yōshū, used four times. 

MYS 2946 

玉桙之 TAMAPOKO NO Though we met on the path 

道尓行相而 MITI niYUKIAPITE protected by the jeweled axe 

外目耳毛 YOSO ME nimo and I saw you only casually, 

見者吉子乎 MIREBA YOKI KWO wo but what a lovely child. 

何時鹿将待 ITU TO KA MATAMU Should I wait to see you again? 

 

珥 


OJ: ni OC: *nəh 

LH: ńəh EMC: ńźɨh GO: ni KN: zi 

NOM: nhẹ SV: nhị SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and is found mainly in Nihon shoki, 
three times in the annotational notes and 81 times in the poetry: 苞苴擔此云珥 
倍毛菟 “ ‘Bear a gift for a superior,’ this is read nipemotu” (NSG), 妍哉、此云 
鞅奈珥夜 “ ‘How delightful,’ this is read ana ni ya” (NSG), This graph is also 
used in names such as 和珥 Wani (NSG). 

NSK 102 

夜酒瀰志斯 yasumisisi In the heavenly 

和餓於朋耆瀰能 wa ga opo kimi no eighty [rays of] sunshine where 

訶勾理摩須 kakurimasu my great lord hides, 

阿摩能椰蘇河礙 ama no yaswokage who rules in peace— 

異泥多々須 idetatasu if you go out and 

瀰蘇羅烏瀰禮麼 miswora wo mireba look at the august sky, 

豫呂豆余珥 yorodu yo ni for ten thousand reigns 

訶勾志茂餓茂 kakusi mogamo may it remain as is, splendid. 


知余珥茂 tiyo nimo For a thousand reigns 

訶勾志茂餓茂 kakusi mogamo may it remain as is, wonderful. 

訶之胡瀰弖 kasikwomite In reverence 

菟伽倍摩都羅武 tukapematuramu we will serve the throne. 

烏呂餓瀰弖 worogamite Prostrate on the ground 

菟伽倍摩都羅武 tukapematuramu we will serve the throne. 

宇多豆紀摩都流 utadukwimaturu I present this song. 

This phonogram also appears in Shoku Nihongi in the name 和珥麻呂 Wani 
Maro (745.4.25). 

 

儞 


OJ: ni OC: *nê 

LH: neʔ EMC: nɨʔ LMC: ri GO: ni KN: zi 

NOM: né, nẻ SV: nhĩ SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, found in Nihon shoki, with six examples 
in annotational notes, and 50 in poetry: 上國、此云羽播豆矩儞 “ ‘Upper land,’ 
this is read upatukuni” (NSG), 大醜、此云鞅奈瀰儞句 “ ‘How ugly,’ this is 
read ana miniku” (NSG). In the following poem it appears eight times. 

NSK 96 

野絁磨倶儞 yasima kuni I searched the eight islands 

都磨々祁哿泥底 tuma makikanete but could not find a spouse. 

播屢比能 parupi no Under the spring sun 

哿須我能倶儞々 kasuga no kuni ni in the land of Kasuga 

倶波絁謎嗚 kupasi mye wo I had heard that 

阿利等枳々底 ari to kikite there was a beautiful maiden. 

與慮志謎嗚 yorosi mye wo I had heart that 

阿利等枳々底 ari to kikite there was a proper woman. 

莽紀佐倶 makwi saku A fine grain of wood, 

避能伊陀圖嗚 pi no itatwo wo I pushed opened that door 

飫斯毘羅枳 osipiraki made of Japanese cypress. 

倭例以梨魔志 ware irimasi I went inside 

阿都圖唎 atwo twori and held her leg, 

都麼怒唎絁底 tumadworisite holding the edge of her hem, 

魔倶囉圖唎 makura twori holding her pillow— 

伊慕我堤嗚 imo ga te wo holding my spouse. 

倭例儞魔柯斯毎 ware ni makasime I wrapped her hand 

倭我堤嗚麼 wa ga te woba around my waist 

伊慕儞魔柯絁毎 imo ni makasime and she my arm— 

麼左棄逗囉 masakwidura wrapped it around her. 

多々企阿藏播梨 tataki azapari And like a vine, 

矢洎矩矢慮 sisikusiro we caressed, intertwined. 

于魔伊禰矢度儞 umai nesi two ni We slept deeply, 

儞播都等唎 nipatu tori sweet like meat on a skewer. 

柯稽播儺倶儺梨 kakye pa nakunari The fowl I keep 

奴都等利 nwotu tori have begun to cackle. 

枳蟻矢播等余武 kigisi pa toyomu And in the fields 

婆絁稽矩謨 pasikyeku mo the pheasants add their call. 


伊麻娜以播孺底 imada ipazute The dawn has already come 

阿開儞啓梨 akenikyeri before I have been able 

倭蟻慕 wagimo to confess my feelings, my love. 

 

丹 


OJ: ni OC: *tân 

LH: tan EMC: tân GO: tamu KN: tan 

NOM: đan, đơn SV: đan, đơn SK: tan 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ ni ‘red clay,’ based on 丹 ‘red.’ The 
oldest datable usage appears in a mokkan dated 697: 丁酉年若狭国小丹生評 
the year (697), WAKASA [NO] KUNI WONIPU KOPORI (MK 182). This usage also 
appears in names and toponyms found in Kojiki: 丹羽臣 NIPA OMI (KG), and 
also in Nihon shoki in cases such as 丹生川 NIPU [NO] KAPA ‘Nifu River’ 
(NSG), 丹裳小野 NIMO WONWO ‘Nimo Moor’ (NSG), and 丹敷浦 NISIKI 
[NO] URA ‘bay of Nisiki’ (NSG). 

 

荷 


OJ: ni OC: *ɡâiʔ 

LH: ɡɑiʔ EMC: ɣâʔ GO: ga KN: ka 

NOM: ha, hà SV: hà, hạ, hả SK: ha 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ ni ‘burden.’ This transcription appears mainly 
in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 42 

潮左為二 SIPOsawi ni Is my beloved 

五十等兒乃嶋邊 IRAGWO no SIMApye riding in the boat rowing 

榜船荷 KOGU PUNE NI by Irago Island 

妹乗良六鹿 IMWO NORUraMU KA in the roaring tide, 

荒嶋廻乎 ARAKI SIMAMWI wo though it is rough going there. 

 

煮 


OJ: ni OC: *taʔ 

LH: tśɑʔ EMC: tśjwoʔ GO: sio KN: sia 

NOM: NA SV: chử SK: cye, cya 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader the Old Japanese infinitive of the verb 
niru ‘to boil,’ ni. This usage appears only in the first book of Nihon shoki and 
Man’yōshū. In Shoki we find this graph used in the following names of deities: 
埿土煮尊 UPIDINI [NO] MIKOTO, and 沙土煮尊 SUPIDINI [NO] MIKOTO 
(NSG). 

Man’yōshū preserves three examples of this usage. 

MYS 612 

中々煮 NAKANAKA NI It would have been better 

黙毛有益乎 MODA mo ARAMASI wo had I remained silent. 

何為跡香 NANI SU TO KA Why did we start 

相見始兼 APIMI SOMEkyemu seeing each other, 

不遂尓 TOGEZARAMAKU ni if there is no chance of success? 


Modern textual research believes the original graph to have been 者 (Satake 
et al. 1999.1: 373), some believing 者 to be an abbreviated form of 煮, but this 
theory seems hard to swallow, as 者 represents pa. Another example is: 

MYS 22 

河上乃 KAPA NO PE no On the sacred cluster of 

湯津盤村二 YUTU IPAMURA ni boulders upriver grass 

草武左受 KUSA musazu does not grow. I wish they 

常丹毛冀名 TUNE NImo GAMO NA could forever remain thus. 

常處女煮手 TUNE WOTOMYE NITE Forever like a young maiden. 

 

似 


OJ: ni OC: *s-ləʔ 

LH: ziəʔ EMC: zɨʔ GO: zi KN: si 

NOM: tợ, tự, tựa SV: tự SK: so 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind the infinitive of the Old Japanese verb 
niru ‘resemble,’ ni. It is used only a six times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 664 

石上 ISWONOKAMI I will not let it stop me, 

零十方雨二 PURU TOMO AME ni even if it should rain, 

将關哉 TUTUMAME YA as if from Isonokami. 

妹似相武登 IMWO NI APAmu to I gave my word to my beloved 

言義之鬼尾 IPITEsi MONO WO that I would see her. 

 

土 


OJ: ni OC: *thâʔ 

LH: thɑʔ EMC: thuoʔ GO: tu KN: to 

NOM: thổ SV: thổ SK: thwo, twu 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ ni ‘red clay.’ This semantogram 
appears twice in Man’yōshū, both times in the same structure: X乎白土 X wo 
SIRANI ‘as I don’t have a clue about X’ (MYS 5, 1792). 

 

瓊 


OJ: ni OC: *ɡweŋ 

LH: ɡyeŋ EMC: ɡjwäŋ GO: gyau KN: kei 

NOM: quỳnh, quềnh SV: quỳnh SK: kyeng 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ ni ‘jewel, red gem,’ but this is an 
unattested Old Japanese word. The association comes from this semantogram 
used to transcribe the imperial deity Ninigi (瓊々杵尊), the name of the 
grandson of the Sun Goddess, which is written in Kojiki as 仁岐 Ninigi (仁 is 
used as nini instead of just ni). Nihon shoki also contains the following helpful 
note: 瓊、玉也。此云努 “ ‘red gem stone’ is a kind of jade. This is read nu.” 
This provides important information that nwi (<*nu-i) is actually the underlying 
form for ni, following the same phonological pattern as kukwi ‘stem’ versus 
kukunoti ‘spirit of the plants’ (kukwi < *kuku-i). 

Other examples in Shoki include 八坂瓊之五百箇御統 YASAKANI [NO] 
IPOTU MISUMARU ‘five hundred jewels of eight saka length on a string’ (NSG), 


八坂瓊曲玉及 YASAKANI MAGATAMA ‘the curved jewel of eight saka length’ 
(NSG). 

 

入 


OJ: nipu OC: *nup > *nəp 

LH: ńip EMC: ńźjəp GO: nifu KN: zifu 

NOM: nhập, nhọp SV: nhập SK: ip 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in the toponym 乎入郡 Wonipu 
District, as preserved in a document in the Shōsōin. 

 

乃 


OJ: no OC: *nə̂ ʔ 

LH: nəʔ EMC: nậiʔ GO: nai KN: dai 

NOM: nãi, nảy SV: nãi SK: nay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on a number of Silla stelae. 
As an example, on the Pyengsin-nyen stele (536 CE) we find: □□失利乃利 … 
XX *sitrinəri, the name of an individual. 

We also find the following on the Namsan Sinsyeng number one stele (591 
CE): 阿良邏頭沙喙音乃古大舎 *Arara dosatəkəm nəkɔ dahśah, a man of the 
12th rank named Arara Dosatokom Noko. 

In the Suiko era corpus 乃 is the only graph used for no, such as in the 
following song preserved in Jōgū Shōtoku Hōō Teisetsu: 

伊加留我乃 ikaruga no Our great ruler’s name 

止美能乎何波乃 tomi no wogapa no will never be forgotten, 

多叡婆許曾 tayeba koso even if the brook 

和何於保支美乃 wa ga opokimi no Tomi in Ikaruga 

弥奈和須良叡米 mina wasurayeme should cease to flow in its bed. 

This graph appears 195 times in the liturgies: 座摩乃御巫乃称辞竟奉皇神 
等 能 前 爾 白 久 WIKASURI no MIKAMUNAGI no KOTO WOPEMATURU 
SUMEGAMWITATI no MAPYE ni MAWOSAku “The female attendants of Ikasuri 
declare before the imperial deities that they have finished their prayers…” (NT 1). 
This phonogram appears on a number of mokkan excavated from the grounds of 
the ancient Fujiwara Palace (fl. 694–710). The following is one example: 撫米 
二古奈乃利毛一古 “two bamboo baskets of threshed rice, and one bamboo 
basket of nanorimwo ‘gulfweed’ ” (MK 1263). There are also examples such as: 
手乎乃奈 TE no wona ‘? of the hand’ (unnumbered tablet), 久ツ乃乎由比四 
kutu no woyupi YO ‘four (batches?) of small shoe strings’ (MK 415). 

This phonogram is also used very sparingly in Kojiki: 大 斗 乃 辨 神 
OPOtwonobye [NO] KAMWI (KG), and in the following poem: 

KK 82 

阿麻陀牟 amadamu Circling the heavens— 

加流乃袁登賣 karu no wotomye if the maiden of Karu 

伊多那加婆 ita nakaba cries so intensely 

比登斯理奴倍志 pito sirinu besi people will find out. 

波佐能夜麻能 pasa no yama no So like the dove 

波斗能 patwo no of Mount Hasa 

斯多那岐爾那久 sita naki ni naku she cries to herself. 


This phonogram also appears frequently in Man’yōshū, approximately 2300 
times, so this phonogram is used quite consistently throughout the anthology. 
Interestingly, however, the phonogram 能 no is more popular in the books 
where phonetic script is widespread (Books 5, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, and 20): 能 
1334 versus 乃 729 examples. 

MYS 796 

伴之伎与之 pasiki yosi Ah, how beloved! 

加久乃未可良尓 kaku nomwi kara ni This is how it turned out— 

之多比己之 sitapi kosi she longingly followed after me 

伊毛我己許呂乃 imwo ga kokoro no but nothing can be done 

須別毛須別那左 subye mo subye nasa about my beloved’s heart. 

This phonogram also appears quite frequently in the poetry preserved in 
Hitachi fudoki. 

伊夜是留乃 iyazeru no How striking! 

阿是乃古麻都爾 aze no kwomatu ni Soft offerings hanging 

由布悉弖々 yupu sidete on the small pine at Aze. 

和乎布利彌由母 wa wo purimiyu mo I can see it waving at me; 

阿是古志麻波母 aze kwosi mapa mo that Aze child is dancing. 

The phonogram 乃 later yields both the hiragana form for の as well as 
the katakana form ノ. 

 

能 


OJ: no OC: *nəŋ 

LH: nə(ŋ) EMC: nəŋ GO: no, nou KN: dou 

NOM: năng, nưng SV: năng SK: nung, nay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, but may actually date earlier to the PBS. 
It appears on the Fune Obito epitaph, writing the name 安理故能刀自 Arikwo 
no Twozi, ‘the wife of Arikwo.’ This phonogram appears in the liturgies 186 
times: 御門能御巫能称辞竟奉皇神等能前爾白久 MIKADWO no MIKAMUNAGI 
no KOTO WOPEMATURU SUMEGAMWITATI no MAPYE ni MAWOSAku “The female 
attendants of Mikado declare before the imperial deities that they have finished 
their prayers…” (NT 1). This phonogram appears frequently on mokkan: 能登郡 
Noto District (MK 2280), 物部大□ 能万呂 MONONOBYE OPOXnomaro (MK 
15), and what appears to be a funny poem: 目毛美須流安保連紀我許等乎志宜 
見賀毛美夜能宇知可礼弖 MATUGE misuru apo MURAZI ki ga koto wo sigeMI 
kamo miya no uti karete ‘Apo Murazi Ki who is showing his eyelashes, alas, is 
noisy and leaves the inner chambers of the palace…’ (unnumbered tablet). The 
pun here is on the kunganas: 目毛 ‘eye-hair’ and 見 ‘see.’ 

This phonogram is the predominate choice in Kojiki to transcribe no. The 
following song is a prime example: 

KK 13 

加牟加是能 kamukaze no On the large boulder 

伊勢能宇美能 ise no umi no by the sea of Ise 

意斐志爾 opwisi ni swept by violent winds— 

波比母登富呂布 papimotoporopu the sea snail crawls about. 

志多陀美能 sitadami no Like the periwinkle 


伊波比母登富理 ipapimotoporopu we will encircle them, 

宇知弖志夜麻牟 utitesi yamamu utterly destroying them. 

This phonogram is also used heavily in Nihon shoki, appearing 31 times in 
annotational notes, and 257 times in poetry: 衫子、此云莒呂母能古 “(the 
name) Koromonoko’ is read koromo no kwo” (NSG). 

NSK 124 

于知波志能 utipasi no Come out, child 

都梅能阿素弭爾 tume no aswobi ni to play at the edge of 

伊提麻栖古 idemase kwo the plank bridge. 

多麻提能伊鞞能 tamade no ipye no Mistress Yaheko of 

野鞞古能度珥 yapyekwo no twozi the Tamade House. 

伊提麻志能 idemasi no There will be no regrets 

倶伊播阿羅珥茹 kui pa arazi zo if you come out. 

伊提麻西古 idemase kwo Come out, child— 

多麻提能鞞能 tamade no ipye no Mistress Yaheko of 

野鞞古能度珥 yapyekwo no twozi the Tamade House. 

This phonogram is also very popular in Man’yōshū, appearing roughly 1538 
times. Interestingly, aside from the books where phonogrammatic usage is high 
(Books 5, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, and 20), it is still used 204 times. As noted, this is 
the preferred phonogram in the phonogrammatic books. In the following chōka it 
appears seven times. 

MYS 800 

父母乎 TITI PAPA wo You feel admiration 

美礼婆多布斗斯 mireba taputwosi seeing your father and mother. 

妻子見礼婆 MYEKWO MIreba You feel love and affection 

米具斯宇都久志 megusi utukusi seeing your wife and children. 

余能奈迦波 yo no naka pa As for society 

加久叙許等和理 kaku zo kotowari this is only natural. 

母智騰利乃 motidori no Like a bird caught in birdlime 

可可良波志母与 kakarapasi mo yo it is difficult to get out, as we 

由久弊斯良祢婆 yukupye siraneba do not know where to go. 

宇既具都遠 ukegutu wo And like one to takes off 

奴伎都流其等久 nukituru gotoku shoes with holes in them 

布美奴伎提 puminukite people who step on 

由久智布比等波 yuku tipu pito pa and walk away from family 

伊波紀欲利 ipakwi ywori are perhaps ones who 

奈利提志比等迦 nari desi pito ka are born of boulders or trees. 

奈何名能良佐祢 na ga NA norasane Tell me your name! 

阿米弊由迦婆 ame pye yukaba If you go toward heaven 

奈何麻尓麻尓 na ga mani mani you can do as you please. 

都智奈良婆 tuti naraba If you are on the earth 

大王伊摩周 OPOKIMI imasu then there is a great ruler. 

許能提羅周 kono terasu Below the sun and moon 

日月能斯多波 PITUKWI no sita pa which sheds light here 

阿麻久毛能 amakumwo no to the ends of where 

牟迦夫周伎波美 mukabusu kipami the clouds of the sky are, 

多尓具久能 taniguku no to the ends of the place 


佐和多流伎波美 sawataru kipami where the toad dwells, 

企許斯遠周 kikosi wosu this is the superior land 

久尓能麻保良叙 kuni no mapora zo that our sovereign rules over. 

可尓迦久尓 kanikaku ni Certainly it is not a place 

保志伎麻尓麻尓 posiki mani mani where one can do this or that 

斯可尓波阿羅慈迦 sika ni arazi ka as his heart desires. 

 

廼 


OJ: no OC: *nə̂ ʔ 

LH: nəʔ EMC: nậiʔ GO: nai KN: dai 

NOM: NA SV: nãi SK: nay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, but appears only in sections of Shoki, 
three times in annotational notes, and 12 times in the songs: 魁帥、此云比鄧誤 
廼伽瀰 ‘leader’ is read pitogwo no kami’ (NSG), 叩頭、此云廼務 ‘bow to the 
ground’ is read nomu’ (NSG). 

NSK 2 

阿妹奈屢夜 ame naru ya In the heavens 

乙登多奈婆多廼 woto tanabata no the jewels strung upon 

汙奈餓勢屢 unagaseru the string hung around 

多磨廼彌素磨屢廼 tama no misumaru no the neck of the Weaver Maiden 

阿奈陀磨波夜 anatama pa ya are very beautiful— 

彌多爾 mitani like the beauty of him who 

輔柁和柁羅須 puta watarasu shines over two hills, 

阿泥素企多伽避顧禰 adisukitakapikwone Ajisuki Taka Hikone. 

 

笶 


OJ: no OC: *lhiʔ 

LH: śiʔ EMC: śiʔ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: thỉ, thẻ SV: thỉ SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This is a variant graph for 矢 ‘arrow,’ and this kungana suggests to the 
reader OJ no ‘arrow.’ This usage appears on a wooden document excavated from 
the Heijō Palace ruins, containing the name 笶原連石足 NOPARA MURAZI 
IPATARI (unnumbered tablet). 

This kungana also appears 12 times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1776 

絶等寸笶 TAYURAKI NO During the springtime 

山之峯上乃 YAMA NO WO NO PE no when the cherry blossoms 

櫻花 SAKURABANA on top of Mount Tayuraki 

将開春部者 SAKAMU PARUPYE PA are in bloom 

君乎将思 KIMI wo SINWOPAMU I will long for you. 

 

荷 


OJ: no OC: *ɡâiʔ 

LH: ɡɑiʔ EMC: ɣâʔ GO: ga KN: ka 

NOM: ha SV: hà, hạ, hả SK: ha 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ no ‘load,’ which is the bound form of 
the free form ni ‘load,’ suggesting that the form originally was nwi < *no-i. The 


most well known usage is found in Shoki: 荷山, Mount Load, glossed as nomure, 
which preserves the Paekche word for mountain as mure. In the Jingū record of 
Shoki we find the following annotational note: 荷持田村 荷持、此云能登利 
“The village of Notorida, the graphs 荷持 ‘load-hold’ are read notori” (NSG). 

This rather rare kungana appears once in Man’yōshū, according to Ōno 
(1977:578), but I have found two examples (MYS 23, 100): 

MYS 100 

東人之 ADUMATO NO Like the cord tied around 

荷向篋乃 NOSAKI NO PAKWO no the box of tribute from 

荷之緒爾毛 NI NO WO nimo the Eastern people of Nosaki, 

妹情尓 IMWO PA KOKORO ni you, my love, tightly have 

乗尓家留香問 NORInikyeru KAmo a hold on my heart. 

 

箆 


OJ: no OC: bi 

LH: bi, bei EMC: bi, biei GO: fai KN: fei 

NOM: NA SV: tì SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ no ‘bamboo used for arrows.’ While the graph 
箆 represents a bamboo comb, it can also represent the bamboo shaft of an arrow. 
This usage appears twice in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1603 

頃者之 KONO KORO NO Lately when you listen 

朝開尓聞者 ASAKE ni KIKEBA at the break of dawn 

足日木箆 ASIPIKWI NO great bucks call for their mates 

山呼令響 YAMA YWOBI TOYOMYE making the mountains, 

狭尾壮鹿鳴哭 SAWOSIKA NAKU MO which tire the legs, resound. 

 

柔 


OJ: nu OC: *nu 

LH: ńu EMC: ńźjəu GO: niu KN:ziu 

NOM: nhu SV: nhu SK: yu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. There is one place in Shoki, in the reign 
of Kinmei, second year, where 久取柔利 is read kusutori in Shaku Nihongi, but 
not in the critical text (Ienaga et al. 1986.2:68). This may be confusion from the 
original kana, which likely glossed this graph 柔 with 奴 which could have 
been read nu or to. It must be acknowledged that two other cases of 柔 are read 
nu (柔等 in Jomei, read nuRA, and 州柔 in Tenji is read tunu). The NKBT also 
reads the above case as kusunuri, on the authority of one manuscript. 
Nevertheless, Shaku Nihongi, on the authority of the older Shiki manuscripts 
reads this as to. The other two cases are read as nu also in Shaku Nihongi. For the 
time being I have included the character here. It is also possible that the graph 
was used for its semantic, and not for its phonetic value. 

 

蕤 


OJ: nu OC: *nui 

LH: ńui EMC: ńźwi GO: nui KN: zui 

NOM: nhuy SV: nhuy SK: ywu 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. There are only two known examples of 
this graph used phonogrammatically. One is from the Tenjukoku Mandala 
embroidered inscription of Hōryūji, where the name of Great King Bidatsu is 
written as 蕤奈久羅乃布刀多麻斯支乃彌己等 Nuna Kura no Putwotama Siki 
no mikoto. The other known example is found in the second year of Tenmu in 
Nihon shoki: 大蕤娘 Princess OPOnu (whose name is also recorded with the 
same graph in Shoku Nihongi). 

 

奴 


OJ: nu OC: *nâ 

LH: nɑ EMC: nuo GO: nu KN: do 

NOM: nô, no, nó SV: nô SK: nwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. Before the Suiko era this phonogram 奴 
was used to transcribe na and then nwo, but with vowel raising (nwo > nu), this 
graph came to used to represent nu. There are apparent vestiges of this graph in 
Nihon shoki, which may point back to the PBS, but without more evidence, it is 
difficult to ascertain. For the time being I stick to the dating of the use of this 
graph in the EJS. 

In Nihon shoki we have a few names that preserve nu: 奴流枳 Nuruki, a 
man from Koguryŏ (though this may be read Nworuki). There is also an 
individual called 奴須久利 Nusukuri dispatched by the King of Kara, but the 
name may also be read Nwosukuri. There are also names of people from 
Paekche: 季徳進奴 Kuwitok Sinnu, 杆率汶斯干奴 Mose Kannu of the fifth 
rank, 奇奴知 Kanuti, and 余奴 Yonu. There is also the mention of a man from 
Silla, 奴弖大舍 Nute of the 19th rank. 

This phonogram also appears in the Suiko era corpus. Examples include 漢 
奴加己利 Nukakori of Aya from Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu. The earliest datable 
example appears on a mokkan dated the ninth month of 699: 己亥年九月三野 
国・汚奴麻里 MINWONWO…Unuma Village (MK 160). This phonogram 
appears once in the liturgies: 心悪子乎生置弖来奴 KOKORO ASIKI KWO wo 
UMIOKIte KInu “…and she came, having given birth to a child with an evil 
heart…” (NT 12). 

This phonogram is the sole graph used in Kojiki to transcribe nu: 都奴 
Tunu, 久奴王 Prince Kunu, and 奴那登母母由良迩 nu na tomomoyura ni 
‘jewels jingle’ (KG). 

KK 82 

阿麻陀牟 amadamu Circling the heavens— 

加流乃袁登賣 karu no wotomye if the maiden of Karu 

伊多那加婆 ita nakaba cries so intensely 

比登斯理奴倍志 pito sirinu besi people will find out. 

波佐能夜麻能 pasa no yama no So like the dove 

波斗能 patwo no of Mount Hasa 

斯多那岐爾那久 sita naki ni naku she cries to herself. 

This phonogram is used once in the annotational notes, and three times in the 
poetry of Nihon shoki: 瑲瑲乎、此云奴儺等母母由羅爾 “ ‘jewels jingle’ this 
is read nu na tomomoyura ni” (NSG). 


NSK 85 

阿佐膩簸囉 asadipara Through the rocky path of 

嗚贈禰嗚須擬 wosone wo sugwi the mountains and over 

謨謀逗頴甫 momodutapu Asaji Plain comes a distant, 

奴底喩羅倶慕與 nute yuraku mo yo continuous jingle of a bell. 

於岐毎倶羅之慕 okime kurasi mo It seems Okime has arrived. 

This phonogram is the primary graph used in Man’yōshū, appearing 412 
times. 

MYS 798 

伊毛何美斯 imwo ga misi The blossoms of the bead tree 

阿布知乃波那波 aputi no pana pa that my beloved saw 

知利奴倍斯 tirinu besi must have scattered— 

和何那久那美多 wa ga naku namida though my tears 

伊摩陀飛那久尓 imada pwi naku ni have not yet dried. 

This phonogram appears once in a poem in the Footprints of the Buddha 
sequence. 

BSS 16 

己乃美阿止乎 kono miato wo Respectfully gazing 

麻婆利麻都礼婆 mabarimatureba at these footprints, 

阿止奴志乃 ato nusi no how we think of 

多麻乃与曾保比 tama no yosopopi the jeweled figure of the owner 

於母保由留可母 omopoyuru kamo of these footprints. 

美留期止毛阿留可 miru goto mo aru ka As if we see him! 

 

怒 


OJ: nu OC: *nah or *naʔ 

LH: nɑh, naʔ EMC: nuoh, nuoʔ GO: nu KN: do 

NOM: nủa, nọ SV: nộ SK: nwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, and appears in the Suiko-era corpus, in 
Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu, in the name 怒那久良布刀多麻斯支天皇 Great 
King Nunakura Putwo Tamasiki. 

This phonogram also appears in the Taihō Census of 702 in the following 
names: 伎怒賣 Kinumye, 知怒賣 Tinumye, 伊怒賣 Inumye, 恵怒賣 
Wenumye, 彌怒麻賣 Minumamye, 麻怒良賣 Manuramye, and 真怒賣 
MAnumye. 

This phonogram is also is used in one annotational note, and three songs and 
annotational notes in Shoki: 茅渟、此云智怒 “ ‘The place name 茅渟,’ this is 
read tinu” (NSG). 

NSK 12 

哆々奈梅弖 tatanamete With our shields arrayed 

伊那瑳能椰摩能 inasa no yama no we have fought many battles 

虚能莽由毛 ko no mayu mo on Mount Inasa, 

易喩耆摩毛羅毘 iyuki mamworapi going through the trees 

多々介陪麼 tatakapeba and watching the enemy. 

和例破椰隈怒 ware pa ya wenu Thus are we famished. 

之摩途等利 simatutori Birds of the island— 


宇介譬餓等茂 ukapi ga tomo come now to our rescue, 

伊莽輸開珥虚禰 ima suke ni kone you friends of the cormorants. 

This phonogram is used consistently in Man’yōshū to represent nwo (which 
see), but there are two poems (MYS 4401, 4403) where 怒 must represent nu, as 
both are part of the verb ki ‘to come.’ 

MYS 4401 

可良己呂武 kara koromu I have come, having left 

須宗尓等里都伎 suswo ni torituki my children who clung. 

奈苦古良乎 naku kwora wo crying, to the sleeves 

意伎弖曽伎怒也 okite so kinu ya of my Paekche robes— 

意母奈之尓志弖 omo nasi ni site in spite of their having no mother. 

 

努 


OJ: nu OC: *nâʔ 

LH: naʔ EMC: nuoʔ GO: nu KN: do 

NOM: nỗ SV: nỗ SK: nwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in the Yōrō Census (721) in 
the name 伊努賣 Inumye. It also appears in the name 智努王 Prince Tinu 
found on the Bussokuseki stone (ca. 753). 

This graph is also used in Nihon shoki in the following annotational note: 瓊、 
玉也。此云努 “ ‘red gem stone’ is a kind of jade. This is read nu” (NSG). 

There are four non-controversial examples of this in Man’yōshū also: 

MYS 1811 

墓上之 PAKA NO PE NO The branches of the tree 

木枝靡有 KONOYE NABIKYERI above the grave are fluttering. 

如聞 KIKISI GOTO As I have heard 

陳努壮士尓之 tinu WOTOKWO nisi she gave her heart 

依家良信母 YORINIkyerasi mo to the young man from Chinu. 

 

弩 


OJ: nu OC: *nâʔ 

LH: naʔ EMC: nuo GO: nu KN: do 

NOM: nỗ, nỏ, ná SV: nỗ SK: nwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, but is used sparingly. Most known 
examples are read nwo (which see) but a few clear examples of nu can be found. 
This phonogram appears in the Chikuzen census of 702 to write the name 弩弖 
Nute. Another example is in Man’yōshū (MYS 1809), where this chōka repeats 
the toponym tinu (Chinu) twice, each with a different set of characters: 智弩 
tinu, 血沼 TINU. This example parallels that found in MYS 1811 where Tinu is 
written as 陳努. 

 

農 


OJ: nu OC: *nûŋ 

LH: nouŋ EMC: nouŋ LMC: ndəwŋ GO: nou KN: dou 

NOM: nông SV: nông SK: nwong 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The earliest datable example of this 
graph is found on a mokkan dated 710: 伊勢国安農郡阿刀里 Ise Province, 
Anu District, Atwo Village. 

This graph also appears in Nihon shoki in two annotational notes and ten 
times in song: 白膠木、此云農利泥 “ ‘Hard Chinese tree,’ this is read nuride” 
(NSG). 

NSK 125 

多致播那播 tatibana pa The fruit of the orange tree 

於能我曳多々々 ono ga yeda yeda grows each on its own branch, 

那例々騰母 nareredomo but when these are strung 

陀麻爾農矩騰岐 tama ni nuk toki together as jewels they are 

於野兒弘儞農倶 oyazi wo ni nuku strung on the same cord. 

There are 10 examples of this graph in Man’yōshū, but all are concentrated in 
Book 5. 

MYS 802 

麻斯提斯農波由 masite sinupayu How I think of my child. 

伊豆久欲利 iduku ywori Where on earth have 

枳多利斯物能曽 kitarisi mono so children come from? 

麻奈迦比尓 manakapi ni Right in front of my eyes 

母等奈可可利提 motona kakarite they are thoughtlessly by me 

夜周伊斯奈佐農 yasuisi nasanu robbing me of a good sleep. 

 

濃 


OJ: nu OC: *nroŋ, nôŋ 

LH: ṇioŋ, noŋ EMC: ṇjwoŋ, nuŋ GO: niu, nou KN: diou 

NOM: nống SV: nông SK: nwong 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in Nihon shoki in two songs. 

NSK 28 

伊徒姑播茂 itwokwo pa mo Men with relatives 

伊徒姑奴池 itwokwo dwoti will fight together. 

伊裝阿波那 iza apana Commence the battle, 

和例波 ware pa shall we? 

多摩岐波屢 tamaki paru Minister Uti, 

于池能阿層餓 uti no aso ga possessing a strong spirit, 

波邏濃知波 paranuti pa does not have a stomach 

異佐誤阿例椰 isagwo are ya made of pebbles. 

伊裝阿波那 iza apana Commence the battle, 

和例波 ware pa shall we? 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, five times. 

MYS 3661 

可是能牟多 kaze no muta The hem of 

与世久流奈美尓 yose kuru nami ni the robes of the fishing 

伊射里須流 izari suru maidens fishing 

安麻乎等女良我 ama wotoMYEra ga in the incoming waves 

毛能須素奴礼奴 mo no suswo nurenu driven with the wind are all wet. 

A variant text has: 


安麻乃乎等賣我 ama no wotomye ga The hem of 

毛能須蘇奴礼濃 mo no suswo nurenu the fishing girl is all wet…. 

 

沼 


OJ: nu OC: *tauʔ 

LH: tśauʔ EMC: tśjäuʔ GO: seu KN: seu 

NOM: trẽo SV: chiểu SK: sywo, cywo 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ nu(ma) ‘marsh,’ and is found on many 
excavated wooden fragments, but sometimes it is unclear if the intended reading 
is nu or numa, so I have ignored these excavated data for the time being. 

Kojiki includes examples such as 沼河比賣 NUKAPA Pimye (KG), 血沼 
海 Sea of TINU (KG), and 沼名木郎女 NUNAKWI IRATUMYE (KG). 
Man’yōshū also contains similar examples using with this semantogram: 

MYS 922 

人皆乃 PITO MINA no If only the lives 

壽毛吾母 INTOI mo WARE mo of all people, including mine, 

三吉野乃 MIYOSINWO no could be eternal 

多吉能床磐乃 taki no TOKWIPA no like these unchanging boulders 

常有沼鴨 TOKO NARANU KAMO at the falls at Miyoshino. 

 

宿 


OJ: nu OC: *suk or *sukh 

LH: siuk, siuh EMC: sjuk, sjəh GO: suku KN: siuku 

NOM: túc SV: túc, tú SK: sywuk, sywu 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ nu ‘sleep.’ This usage only appears seven 
times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1056 

𡢳嬬等之 WOTOMYERA GA Mount Kase, the spindle— 

續麻繁云 UMIWO KAKU TOPU like the thing maidens 

鹿脊之山 KASE NO YAMA wrap spun wool on, 

時之徃者 TOKIsi YUKYEREBA has changed with the times. 

京師跡成宿 MIYAKWO TO NARINU It has become a metropolis. 

 

寐 


OJ: nu OC: *mis 

LH: mis EMC: mih GO: mi KN: bi 

NOM: mị SV: mị SK: moy, mi 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ nu ‘sleep.’ This usage appears twice in the 
poetry of Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2070 

久堅之 PISAKATA NO Let not this night end 

天河津尓 AMA NO KAPADU ni as I wait for my lord 

舟泛而 PUNE UKETE and prepare the ship 

君待夜等者 KIMI MATU YWORA PA at the port of the heavenly river, 

不明毛有寐鹿 AKEZU mo ARANU KA distant and firm. 

 


渟 


OJ: nu OC: *dêŋ 

LH: deŋ EMC: dieŋ GO: diau KN: tei 

NOM: dềnh SV: đình, đuềnh SK: tyeng 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ nu ‘marsh.’ This graph appears in 
Nihon shoki in names like 豐斟渟尊 the deity TOYO KUMUNU (NSG), 天渟 
名井 AMA [NO] NUNAWI the heavenly Nuna well (NSG), and 茅渟山 Mount 
TINU (NSG). This graph also appears a few times in Man’yōshū, once to write 
茅渟 TINU (MYS 1809), and three times to represent the name of Tenmu 天渟 
中原瀛真人天皇 AMA [NO] NUNAPARA OKI [NO] MAPITO SUMYERA NO 
MIKOTO (MYS 22, 103, 156). 

 

潤 


OJ: nuni OC: *nuns 

LH: ńuinh EMC: ńźjwenh GO: nimu KN: ziun 

NOM: nhuần SV: nhuận SK: ywun 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This rare usage appears in Harima 
fudoki in the toponyms 雲潤 Ununi, where the first phonogram is un and the 
final nasal leads to the next nasal, nu, showing it was a short vowel. 

It should be pointed out that many scholars, following the varied glosses in 
the fudoki texts, believe that 雲潤 should be read urumi. Consider the note that 
explains the etymology as preserved in fudoki, “The reason this village is called 
雲潤 is because when the deity Nitu Pikwo said, ‘I want to cross over 
downstream of the Papuda River toward 雲潤,’ the great water deity that resided 
in that village spoke and declared, ‘I take the blood of beasts and cultivate my 
fields. Thus I do not desire water from the river.’ Nitu Pikwo said, ‘This deity has 
spoken thus because he is weary (umite) from digging a canal for a river.’ Thus 
that place was called umi (雲彌). Present day people call it 雲潤.” For the time 
being, I have tried to be faithful to the underlying Chinese phonology, as nuni fits 
better. 

 

奴 


OJ: nwo OC: *nâ 

LH: nɑ EMC: nuo GO: nu KN: do 

NOM: nô, no, nó SV: nô SK: nwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It is difficult to know whether this is a 
derogatory graph, meaning ‘slave,’ replaced by the Chinese historiographical 
office, or was used by the Wa. My personal view is that this phonogram was a 
derogatory graph used by the Chinese historiographers. Before the establishment 
of Yamatai, the graph 奴 was read na, but by the latter end of the Later Han era, 
the vowel had backed to nɔ. This graph appears in many word preserved in Wei 
zhi. An auxiliary official is called 卑奴母離 *pe-nɔ-mɔ-rai, which is often 
interpreted as the forerunner for the hinamori or border guards of Man’yōshū 
poetry. I have tentatively interpreted this title as originally meaning ‘grove of the 
western field,’ where a grove or forest referred to a place where the deities 
communicated with humans (2008:18–19). 

This phonogram appears several times in the other ‘barbaric’ sections of Wei 


zhi: 匈奴 *xoŋ-nɔ, 樂奴國 *lak-nɔ domain. This graph also appears on several 
steles on the peninsula. On the Kwangkaytho stele we have: 奴抜城 *nɔ-bat 
fortress, 閏奴城 *ɲwin-nɔ fortress, 貫奴城 *kwan-nɔ fortress, and □□豆奴 
城 *X-X-do-nɔ fortress. 

Vestiges of this usage appear also in Nihon shoki, showing that the usage 
survived in some strata of the PBS. The Paekche record preserves the name of a 
Yamato person, 日本斯那奴阿比多 Sinanwo Apita (of Yamato) and 斯那奴次 
酒 Sinanwo Sicu, both likely from the Shinano (< sinanwo) area of Japan. There 
is also an individual called 奴須久利 Nwosukuri dispatched by the King of 
Kara, but the name may also be read Nusukuri. 

This usage appears once in documents preserved in Shōsōin: 美奴 Minwo. 
There is a fragment of a wooden document excavated in Shizuoka Prefecture 
with what may be a toponym: 都奴我 either tunwoga or tunuga (MK 68). 

 

努 


OJ: nwo OC: *nâʔ 

LH: naʔ EMC: nuoʔ GO: nu KN: do 

NOM: nỗ SV: nỗ SK: nwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. Because of the ambiguity between being 
used to transcribe nu and nwo, it is somewhat difficult to find unambiguous 
examples of this graph in early fragments. Kojiki contains only one example of 
this phonogram transcribing nwo: 美努 ‘(province of) Minwo (KG). Thus 
Kojiki elects to avoid the ambiguity of this graph. 

Nihon shoki also only uses this graph twice, once in an annotational note and 
once in a song: 小竹、此云芝努 “ ‘Small bamboo,’ this is read sinwo” (NSG). 

NSK 110 

烏智可拕能 wotikata no The pheasants in the sparse field 

阿娑努能枳々始 asanwo no kigisi off in the distance 

騰余謀佐儒 toyomosazu are making noise— 

倭例播禰始柯騰 ware pa nesikado we have slept without a sound, 

比騰曾騰余謀須 pito so toyomosu how people are making a fuss! 

This phonogram is the main one used in Man’yōshū to transcribe nwo, 
appearing 102 times, the majority to represent sinwopi- ‘to long for,’ or tanwos- 
‘pleasant’: 

MYS 3725 

和我世故之 wa ga sekwosi My beloved, perhaps 

氣太之麻可良婆 kyedasi makaraba if you are to go away, 

思漏多倍乃 sirwotape no please wave your sleeve, 

蘇低乎布良左禰 swode wo purasane made of soft white bark. 

見都追志努波牟 MItutu sinwopamu I shall long for you as I watch. 

 

怒 


OJ: nwo OC: *nah or *naʔ 

LH: nɑh, naʔ EMC: nuoh, nuoʔ GO: nu KN: do 

NOM: nủa, nọ SV: nộ SK: nwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, appearing in Kojiki: 布怒豆怒神 the 
deity Punwotunwo (KG). It is the sole graph in Kojiki for nwo in poetry. 


KK 35 

阿佐士怒波良 asazinwopara A field of shallow, thin bamboo 

許斯那豆牟 kosi nadumu keeps us from making progress. 

蘇良波由賀受 swora pa yukazu Without taking to the skies 

阿斯用由久那 asi ywo yuku na we go by foot. 

This phonogram also appears four times in the poetry of Shoki: 

NSK 34 

知麼能 tiba no Looking out over 

伽豆怒塢彌例麼 kadunwo wo mireba the verdant plain of Kazu, 

茂々智儾蘆 momotidaru I behold before me 

夜珥波母彌喩 yanipa mo miyu an abundance of villages— 

區珥能朋母彌喩 kuni no po mo miyu I also see a land of excellence. 

Man’yōshū also preserves eight examples of this phonogram: 

MYS 4403 

意保枳美能 opokimi no What fear and wonder 

美己等可之古美 mikoto kasikwomi for our great lord— 

阿乎久牟乃 awokumu no I have come over 

等能妣久夜麻乎 tonobiku yama wo the mountains 

古与弖伎怒加牟 kwoyote kinwo kamu where blue clouds trail. 

 

弩 


OJ: nwo OC: *nâʔ 

LH: naʔ EMC: nuo GO: nu KN: do 

NOM: nỗ, nỏ, ná SV: nỗ SK: nwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, but it is somewhat difficult to know 
precisely how often it was used. There is some graphic confusion between this 
graph and 努・怒. This phonogram is used twice in the same song in Nihon 
shoki: 

NSK 126 

美曳之弩能 miyesinwo no The trout of Eshino 

曳之弩能阿喩 yesinwo no ayu beautiful Mieshino— 

阿喩擧曾播 ayu koso pa it is good for 

施麻倍母曳岐 simape mo yeki you trout to be near the island. 

愛倶流之衞 ekurusiwe Ah, how painful 

奈疑能母騰 nagwi no moto to be under the water-greens 

制利能母騰 seri no moto to be under the water-cress. 

阿例播倶流之衞 are pa kurusiwe I am in pain. 

According to Ōno (1977:577) this phonogram appears in Man’yōshū twice, 
but I have been able to find three examples (MYS 1609, 1624, 1809): 

MYS 1624 

吾之蒔有 WA GA NARERU It is a head dress 

早田之穂立 WASADA NO PO MOTI I made from rice stalks 

造有 TUKURITARU from early rice plants 

蘰曽見乍 KADURA so MITUTU I am harvesting. Think of me, 

師弩波世吾背 sinwopase WA GA SE my beloved, as you look at it. 

 


野 


OJ: nwo OC: laʔ 

LH: jaʔ EMC: jiaʔ GO: ya KN: ya 

NOM: dã SV: dã SK: ya 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ nwo ‘field, moor.’ The earliest 
datable example of this is found on a mokkan dated 682: 壬午年十月□毛野 
“Year 682, 10th month, X KENWO….” There is another mokkan dated 683 with 
the following: 癸未年七月三野大野評阿漏里 “Year 683, seventh month. 
MINWO (Province), OPONWO District, Arwo Village….” These actually may 
be logograms. 

Also, in the Taihō Census (702) the following names are recorded: 三野賣 
MINWOmye, 麻野比賣 MaNWO Pimye, and 都野麻呂 TuNWO Maro. 

According to Ōno (1977:25), the Suiko era corpus does not preserve any 
examples of nwo in phonograms, but there is one example with this logogram, 
野. This is also true of Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu: 大野岡 OPONWO WOKA 
‘Ōno Hill.’ The absence of any phonograms for nwo likely reflects later rewriting, 
when nwo and nu appeared orthographically confused, and a semantogram usage 
was employed. This kungana appears on a variety of mokkan: 余志野女 
YosiNWOMYE (unnumbered tablet). 


O 

 

 

意 



OJ: o OC: *ʔəkh 

LH: ʔɨəh EMC: ʔɨ GO: i KN: i 

NOM: ấy, ý SV: ý, ỳ SK: uy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS, and appears on the Inariyama tumulus 
sword inscription 意富比垝 *əpəpikwai > opopikwo ‘great prince?’ and on the 
Suda Hachiman mirror inscription (ca. 500) 意柴沙加宮 *əzasaka MIYA, 
traditionally read osisaka ‘Oshisaka Palace,’ and on the inscription of the 
Tenjukokushuchō at Chūgūji (ca. 622) 阿米久爾意斯波留支比里爾波乃彌己 
等 ame kuni osiparuki no mikoto, the name of Great King Kinmei. 

Regardless of the use of this ancient phonogram, the literati appear to have 
shied away from using it in poetic composition. Shoki’s rich poetry uses only 
three phonograms for /o/ in syllable-initial position 於・飫・淤 (there are two 
others [憶・乙] but these are each used only once), while the annotative notes 
employ the same three. Kojiki, on the other hand, uses this phonogram [意] for o 
a total of 33 times, though the poets appear to have preferred 淤, used 47 times. 

It should be mentioned here that Mabuchi (1957:81–83) had postulated that 
there anciently was a difference in the vocalism with 意 and 淤. He proposes 
that 意 represents type A, and 淤 type B o. Rather than simply checking the 
employment of the phonograms in Kojiki, checking the historical Chinese 
phonology is the more accurate approach to confirm this theory. Since 意 came 
into the ancient Japanese corpus around the late fourth or early fifth centuries, 
Later Han is the proper stage to search for the phonology the ancient Japanese 
used to map this graph onto the phoneme of Old Japanese. Compare these values: 

 

Graph OC LH EMC NOM SK 

意 *ʔǝh ʔɨəh ʔɨ ấy uy 

淤 *ʔa ʔɨɑ ʔɨa ứa e 

 

There does not appear to have been a difference in rounding, as both nuclei 
are mid and unrounded. Therefore, there is sufficient evidence to say that Kojiki 
did not make a distinction between two varieties of /o/. Both graphs 意淤 were 
used to transcribe initial /o/. This phonogram appears on several mokkan: 意伎 
麻呂 Okimaro (MK 349), 意母都良牟奈 omoturamuna unknown meaning 
(unnumbered tablet), 備前国乾意毘壱斗伍升 ‘one PAKWO and five MASU 
(about nine bushels) of dried opi ‘black persimmon’ from Bizen Province’ (MK 
20:33). 

Below are two samples of 意, one each from Kojiki and Nihon shoki: 

KK 63 

都藝泥布 tuginepu Thick with trees 

夜麻斯呂賣能 yamasiromye no the maiden of Yamashiro— 

許久波母知 kokupa moti cultivating great radishes 


宇知斯意富泥 utisi opone with her wooden hoe. 

佐和佐和迩 sawa sawa ni And noisily 

那賀伊幣勢許曾 na ga ipese koso you say things to me, 

宇知和多須 utiwatasu so from far and wide 

夜賀波延那須 yagapaenasu thick as the forest 

岐伊理麻韋久禮 ki iri mawikure people have come here. 

It should be mentioned that ‘great root’ (> radish) is also written as 淤富泥 
in poem KK 61, showing overlap with 意淤. 

In Nihon shoki, in the reign of Jingū, a Paekche village is written 意流村, 
glossed as oru SUKI. 

This phonogram appears in Man’yōshū, used 36 times, though 於 became 
the primary graph for the compiler (appearing 428 times): 

MYS 812 

許等騰波奴 koto topanu Though a piece of wood does not 

紀尓茂安理等毛 kwi nimo ari tomo utter words, would I ever lay it 

和何世古我 wa ga sekwo ga on the ground, that favorite 

多那礼乃美巨騰 tanare no mikoto august koto belonging 

都地尓意加米移母 tuti ni okame ya mo to my beloved elder? 

 

於 


OJ: o OC: *ʔa 

LH: ʔɨɑ EMC: ʔɨa GO: o KN: yo 

NOM: ư, ớ, ờ, ưa SV: ư SK: e 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This graph appears on the 
Kwangkaytho stele: 於利城 *ʔɨɑ-ri fortress. Also, on the stele erected by Silla 
and T’ang after the destruction of Paekche in 660, we find the following name: 
於曾城 *ʔɨɑ-tsəŋ fortress. This lends evidence that the Japanese likely learned 
this usage from their Paekche teachers. 

Also consider that this phonogram (於) appears in fragments from the Suiko 
era corpus. It appears in Jōgū shōtoku hōō teisetsu (ca. 800, but many parts are 
clearly from the Suiko era) three times. One example is 阿米久爾於志波留支廣 
庭天皇, ame kuni osiparuki PIRO NIPA SUMYERA [NO] MIKOTO (the name of Great 
King Kinmei). There are several problems with this rendition. One is that the 
usage of ‘emperor’ 天皇 did not come into regular use until around the era of 
Tenmu or Jitō. Regardless, this is likely nothing more than the compiler of 
Teisetsu taking a clearly old name and adding ‘emperor’ to it, mirroring the text 
in Nihon shoki. The phonology works out perfectly, with the representation of the 
name also employing four phonograms from the WS or PBS (阿爾支留). Thus it 
seems clear that the orthographic representation of this name originated from 
around the Suiko era. 

There is only one example in the liturgies: 諸御神等波平久於太比爾伊麻 
佐布倍志登申 MORO MIKAMWITATI pa TAPIRAKEku odapi ni imasapu besi to 
MAWOSE ‘Declare that the various august deities will be appeased and shall reside 
at peace…’ (NT 16). 

There are also 34 examples of this phonogram in the beta section of Shoki. 
The following is an example of an annotational note and a poem: 碩田此云於保 
岐陁 “ ‘The place name 碩田’ is to be read opokita” (NSG). 


NSK 43 

望苔幣破 motopye pa I thought of you 

枳瀰烏於望臂涅 kimi wo omopide at the trunk of the tree. 

須慧幣破 suwepye pa I remembered you 

伊暮烏於望比涅 imo wo omopide when I looked up at the crown. 

伊羅那鷄區 iranakyeku I felt such sorrow 

曾虚珥於望比 soko ni omopi thinking of you there. 

伽那志鷄區 kanasikyeku I felt such sadness 

虚々珥於望臂 koko ni omopi thinking about you here. 

伊枳羅儒層區屢 ikirazu so kuru I left without cutting down 

阿豆瑳由瀰摩由瀰 adusayumi mayumi the tree for the catalpa bow. 

This is the main graph used to transcribe o in Man’yōshū, used 428 times: 

MYS 104 

吾岡之 WA GA WOKA NO The fine powdered snow 

於可美尓言而 okami ni IPITE I told the water deity 

令落 PURASIMESI residing in my hill 

雪之摧之 YUKI NO KUDAKEsi to make fall seems to have 

彼所尓塵家武 SOKO ni TIRIkyemu scattered over to your side. 

The cursive form of this phonogram later becomes the kana form of お, and 
the katakana form took part of the phonogram to create オ. 

 

淤 


OJ: o OC: *ʔa 

LH: ʔɨɑ EMC: ʔɨa GO: o KN: yo 

NOM: ứ, ứa SV: ứ SK: e 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the EJS. See 意 OJ: o above for the Mabuchi (1957) 
theory that there were two varieties of o (意・淤). It is perhaps more accurate to 
say that while 意 is from the PBS, 淤 was a Japanese native court innovation 
(whether this was done by native Wa people, or Paekche scribes who had 
immigrated to the court, is debatable). 

As noted above under the graph 意, there are many examples of 淤 in 
Kojiki. The title omi is consistently written 淤美 (though there is one case of 意 
美). ‘Offing’ is written either 淤岐 or 淤伎. 

There are only two examples of 淤 in Nihon shoki, one in annotational note 
and one in a poem: 喧響此云淤等娜比 “ ‘reverberate’ is read otonapi” (NSG). 

NSK 39 

伽辭能輔珥 kasi no pu ni In an oak forest 

豫區周塢菟區利 yokusu wo tukuri we made a wide mortar. 

豫區周珥 yokusu ni In that wide motar 

伽綿蘆淤朋瀰枳 kamyeru opomiki we brewed this auspicious wine. 

宇摩羅珥 umara ni Enjoy it as 

枳虚之茂知塢勢 kikosi moti wose you partake of it— 

摩呂餓智 maro ga ti our father. 

 

飫 


OJ: o OC: *ʔah 

LH: ʔɨɑh EMC: jɨa GO: o KN: yo 

NOM: ứ SV: ứ SK: e 


Usage / History: 

The phonogram 飫 belongs to the LJS. This graph appears in Nihon shoki 
and Man’yōshū. Ōno (1962:148) mentions that 飫 is a phonogram worthy of 
note, but he does not elaborate, leaving the reader hanging. This phonogram 
appears in Shoki two times in the annotational notes, and a total of 19 times in the 
poetry: 曰母木邑。今云飫悶廼奇訛也 “That village was called OMOKWI 
‘mother-tree.’ The place now called Omonokwi is a corruption of this.” 

NSK 5 

飫企都鄧利 okitu tori Birds of the offing— 

軻茂豆勾志磨爾 kamoduku sima ni ducks gather on the island. 

和我謂禰志 wa ga winesi As long as I live 

伊茂播和素邏珥 imo pa wasurazi I will always remember 

譽能據鄧馭鄧母 yo no kotogoto mo the maiden with whom I slept. 

This phonogram appears only twice in Man’yōshū, both times to transcribe 
the place name Ou: 飫宇海 ou [NO] UMI (MYS 371), 飫宇能海 ou no UMI 
(MYS 536). 

 

憶 


OJ: o OC: *ʔək 

LH: ʔɨək EMC: ʔik GO: oku KN: yoku 

NOM: ức, SV: ức SK: uk, ek 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to LJS, appearing only sparingly in Shoki and 
Man’yōshū. There is only one example in Shoki, appearing in poetry. 

NSK 4 

憶企都茂播 okitu mo pa It comes to the shore 

陛爾播譽戻耐母 pye ni pa yoredomo the seaweed in the offing; 

佐禰耐據茂 sanedoko mo but my wife comes not— 

阿黨播怒介茂譽 atapanu kamo yo refusing to give me a bed. 

播磨都智耐理譽 pamatu tidori yo Ah, the plovers on the beach! 

Another well known example of this phonogram comes from the name of the 
famous Man’yō poet, Yamanoue Okura 山 上憶良 (ca. 660–733). Ōno 
(1962:426) wonders if the traditional reading of okura is correct. It may have 
been okora, as we have good reason to believe, that he was of Paekche ancestry 
(Nakanishi 1972:174–178), thus either vowel /o/ or /u/ could have been inserted 
to represent what was probably his real name, Okla. The lingering velar in the 
Chinese phonological structure (the -k persisted into LMC) may have been used 
here to represent that. It should be noted that this phonogram and a related graph 
億 are always used proceeding another phonogram that is transcribing a velarinitial 
syllable, thus ok-kV. Ōno (1962:450) provides the following examples: 億 
岐 o-ki, 億計 o-kye, 億嶋 o-ki-sima, 億志 o-kosi. It would thus appear that 
this phonogram was used, with its final -k, to form a geminate that told the reader 
the next vowel was short. 

 

應 


OJ: o OC: *ʔəŋh 

LH: ʔɨŋh EMC: ʔiŋ GO: ou, omu KN: you 

NOM: ưng, ứng SV: ưng, ứng SK: ung 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only once in Man’yōshū in 
the word 應婢 obi ‘belt’ (MYS 4130). The phonogram 應 appears a great 
number of times in Man’yōshū, but the usages fall into two groups: a graph to 
transcribe the debitive byesi ‘should, can, might have,’ or to represent its Chinese 
semantic meaning of ‘reply.’ There are many examples of this phonogram in 
Hokekyō ongi transcribed as wou, which is a later corruption of an earlier ou. 
There is also one example of this phonogram glossed as omu (Ogura 1995.2:208– 
211), perhaps an attempt to deal with the original velar nasal coda. 

 

隠 


OJ: o OC: *ʔənʔ 

LH: ʔɨnʔ EMC: ʔɨn GO: omu KN: in 

NOM: ẩn, ổn SV: ấn, ẩn SK: un 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It was used quite frequently, being 
found in Kojiki (once), the imperial edicts of Shoku Nihongi (once), Izumo fudoki 
(once), and the text of Shoku Nihongi. Interestingly, all these examples represent 
the same place name: Oki Island 隠岐嶋. 

 

音 


OJ: omi OC: *ʔəm 

LH: ʔɨm EMC: ʔim GO: omu KN: in 

NOM: âm SV: âm SK: um 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. While the LH and EMC data appear to 
show a high, front vowel, data from all three Sino-Xenic strains show a mid 
vowel (with the assumption that Go-on is originally showing əm). This is found 
in Shoku Nihongi in the name 家原音那 IPYEPARA Omina (712.9.3). 

 

磤 


OJ: ono OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: NA GO: on KN: in 

NOM: NA SV: NA SK: un 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. Because of the rarity of this graph, it is 
difficult to garner very much Sino-Xenic information. The Go-on and SK 
information is all that I can locate, but it should be noted that the OC of the 
related graph 殷 is *ʔən, while the SV of the same graph is ân, demonstrating 
that all three Sino-Xenic strains appear to have had an initial unrounded vowel. 
This graph only appears in Nihon shoki in the mythical story of the birth of the 
island Onogoro: 磤馭慮嶋 onogoro SIMA. In Kojiki the name of this island is 
transcribed as 淤能碁呂嶋. 

 

邑 


OJ: opa, opo OC: *ʔəp 

LH: ʔip EMC: ʔip GO: ofu KN: ifu 

NOM: ấp, ọp SV: ấp SK: up 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage appears in the the Mino 
Census of 702 writing the name 邑等 Opoto (or perhaps Opato) and 邑等名 


OpotoNA (or OpatoNA). Ōno (1977:33) suggests that these two are actually 
representing Opito. However, Nihon shoki, in the record of Jitō (in 693), has the 
name 巨勢邑治 glossed as Kose Opodi, which seems to suggest that the 邑 is 
here actually transcribing opo. Shoku Nihongi also perserves this same name of 
巨勢朝臣邑治 (707.3.2) read as Kose Asomi Opodi. Interestingly, there are a 
few other names preserved in Shoku Nihongi: an emisi named 邑良志別君 
Oporasi BETU KIMI (715.10.29), and a district 邑久 郡 Opoku District 
(743.5.28). A slightly different reading is preserved in the district name 邑樂郡 
glossed as Oparaki (769.4.27). This transcription is supported by the later usage 
in Wamyōshō, where the district is transcribed 於波良岐 oparaki. Interestingly, 
a wooden tablet was excavated from the ruins of the Fujiwara Palace (fl. 694– 
710), and on it appears the place name 大荒城評 OPOARAKWI District (MK 
168). Regarding the graph 邑, this appears on several mokkan: 備前国邑久郡 
Bizen Province Opoku District (MKK 10:91). 

 

乙 


OJ: oto, o OC: *ʔrət 

LH: ʔɨt EMC: ʔit GO: oti KN: itu 

NOM: ất, hắt SV: ất SK: ul 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in Kougryo-ki in a listing of 
noble ranks: 乙耆 Jet-ɡji (Takeuchi 1977:34). The earliest datable example of 
this in Japan appears in the Mino Census of 702 in the name 乙麻呂 Oto Maro. 
There is a single example of this usage in Nihon shoki: 乙等, but the text glosses 
this as Oto. This usage appears in Man’yōshū, in names such as 忍坂部乙麻呂 
OSISAKABYE Oto Maro (MYS 71), 石上乙麻呂 ISWONOKAMI Oto Maro 
(MYS 368), and 能登臣乙美作 Noto [NO] OMI Oto Misaka (MYS 4069). 

 

 


P 

 

 

巴 



OJ: pa OC: *prâ 

LH: pa EMC: pa GO: fa KN: fa 

NOM: ba, bơ SV: ba SK: pha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, appearing in Wei zhi, in the toponym 巴 
利 *pa-ri. It also appears on inscriptions on the peninsula. On the Kwangkaytho 
stele: 巴奴城 *pa-nɔ fortress. It also appears on the Silla Pyengsin-nyen stele 
(536 CE): 人只珎巴伊即刀 ‘…a person (named) *Kietorpa Itsitɑu.’ 

This phonogram also appears in a set of words ascribed to the language of 
Silla: 宇泥咩巴椰、彌々巴椰 unemye paya mimi paya. The Shoki compiler 
notes that the Silla men could not pronounce the names of the mountains Unebi 
and Miminasi correctly, so these became uneme and mimi, though this 
interpretation sounds forced. The following names of peninsular figures do 
contain this graph to transcribe pa: 賁巴委佐 Punpawasa, a man from Ara 
(Shoki glosses this name as Ponpawasa), 膳臣巴提便 KASIPADE [NO] OMI 
Padepi (which looks like a Japanese person born in Paekche, as the name does 
not seem sound Japanese), and a Paekche place name: 百濟加巴利濱 Kapari 
Beach in Paekche. 

Briefly, the reason I have relegated so-called ha-gyō phonograms to p- is 
because of careful research conducted by Miyake (1999, 2003a). As the Sino- 
Xenic data illustrate in this and other examples, the phonograms selected to 
represent what we call the ha-gyō series of sounds were for the most part a 
voiceless bilabial obstruent. I refer the reader to Miyake (2003a:164–166) for an 
explanation of examples where a bilabial fricative is used in Nihon shoki. 

 

伴 


OJ: pa OC: *phâns 

LH: phanh EMC: phwânh GO: ban KN: fan 

NOM: bạn, bọn SV: bạn SK: pan 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This usage only appears in the Keitai 
record of Nihon shoki. One simple example comes from the seventh year of 
Keitai, where the land known to the Korean as Ponpi is written 伴跛, papwi. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, eight times. 

MYS 796 

伴之伎与之 pasiki yosi Ah, how beloved! 

加久乃未可良尓 kaku nomwi kara ni This is how it turned out— 

之多比己之 sitapi kosi she longingly followed after me 

伊毛我己許呂乃 imwo ga kokoro no but nothing can be done 

須別毛須別那左 subye mo subye nasa about my beloved’s heart. 

 


半 


OJ: pa, pani OC: *pâns 

LH: panh EMC: pwânh GO: famu KN: fan 

NOM: bán SV: bán SK: pan 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This graph appears on the Inariyama 
tumulus sword inscription: 半弖比[垝] *pante-pi(kwa-i). It is highly probable 
that the final -n in pan was intended to show the pre-nasalization of the following 
syllable: pa-nde-pi-kwa-i. The final graph of this name has disappeared as the 
surface of the sword has degraded, but as there is another name with pikwa-i (比 
垝) mentioned on the sword, this presumed reading is at least an educated guess. 

The phonogram 半 also appears in Paekche quotes found in Nihon shoki: 
半古 pankwo, 散半奚旱岐 Sanpange Kanki ‘Prince Sanpange,’ and 散半下 
Sanpanga ‘land of Sanpanga.’ It seems quite plausible, as noted above, that in all 
these examples, the final -n simply denotes prenasalization of the following 
syllable. 

This usage also appears in the earliest extant census, the Mino Census of 
702: 半布里 Panipu Village. It also appears in documents preserved in the 
Shōsōin: 半太連稲村 Pada MURAZI INAMURA, and 半布 Panipu. Thus we 
see that this phonogram was used early on either to show prenasalization, or to 
transcribe pani. 

This phonogram appears in Man’yōshū, twice as what may be pani, and three 
times as pa. 

MYS 3846 

法師等之 papusiRA GA You must not 

鬚乃剃杭 PIGE no SORI KUPI violently pull on the horse 

馬繋 UMA TUNAGI that is tied up to the stubble 

痛勿引曽 ITAKU NA PIKI so on the chin of the bonze. 

僧半甘 POPUSI pa nakamu The bonze will likely cry. 

Some have interpreted this poem with 半甘, and the same in the next (MYS 
3847), as panikamu ‘gnash one’s teeth in anger,’ but others interpret 半 as naka 
‘half way between, in the middle’; thus NAKA+kamu = NAkamu. I have followed 
this interpretation for the present, though the other possibility is still plausible. 

MYS 849 

能許利多留 nokoritaru Blossoms of the plum 

由棄仁末自例留 yuki ni mazireru mixed in with 

宇梅能半奈 ume no pana the snow that remains— 

半也久奈知利曽 payaku na tiri so Do not scatter so quickly, 

由吉波氣奴等勿 yuki pa kenu tomo even if the snow should vanish. 

 

叵 


OJ: pa OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: pha GO: fa KN: fa 

NOM: NA SV: phả SK: pha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram is a combination of 不 ‘not’ and 可 ‘can,’ and thus means 
‘cannot.’ The reading of pa originates from fanqie: 不 p- + 可 -a. This rather 
strange usage belongs to the PBS, and appears on the Kwangkaytho stele: 叵富 
山 Mount Papo. 


This usage also appears twice in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 3256 

數々丹 SIKUSIKU NI She will probably not be 

不思人叵 OMOPAZU PITO pa thinking constantly of me, 

雖有 ARURAMEDO but alas, I will not 

蹔文吾者 SIMASIKU mo A PA be able to forget her 

忘枝沼鴨 WASURAYENU KAMO for at least a little while. 

Ōno (1977:580) also believes that MYS 385 contains 叵, but there is some 
reason to believe that this graph is actually a mistake for 可. Regardless, 
choosing either of these two graphs results in words that are difficult to interpret. 
Consider the following choices: 

Option 1 

草取叵奈和 KUSA TORI panawa Cutting herbs, panawa… 

Option 2 

草取可奈和 KUSA TORI kanawa Cutting herbs, kanawa… 

It is possible that panawa has something to do with letting go of the herbs 
that have been cut, a theory put forth by Satake et al. (1999.1:252–253), but the 
problem remains: what exactly is panawa? Is this one word? Two? It is difficult 
to decipher. 

 

波 


OJ: pa OC: *pâi 

LH: pɑi EMC: pwâ GO: fa KN: fa 

NOM: ba SV: ba SK: pha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, appearing as early as the Suiko era. It is 
found in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu in toponyms and personal names: 伊波礼 
Ipare, 久波太女王 Princess Kupada, 波止利女王 Princess Patori, 難波 
Nanipa, and 阿米久尓意斯波留支比里尓波乃弥己等 Ame Kuniosi Paruki 
Pironipa no Mikoto (Great Ruler Kinmei). This phonogram appears 96 times in 
the liturgies: 山野能物波甘菜辛菜、青海原能物波波多能広物波多能狭物奥 
都毛波邊津毛波爾至麻弖 YAMANWO no MONO pa AMANA KARANA, AWOMI [NO] 
PARA no MONO pa pata no PIROMONO pata no SAMONO, OKItu mwopa pyeTU 
mwopa ni ITARU made “Including things down to sweet herbs and bitter herbs 
from the mountain moors, things with wide fins and narrow fins from the ocean 
plains, and seaweed from the offing and close to the shore” (NT 5). This 
phonogram appears frequently on mokkan: 阿波国那賀郡 Apa Province Naga 
District (MK 2183), 乎波売 Wopamye (MK 3291), 謹申木未呂阿何波知・ 
木未呂和礼波知 ‘I humbly declare, MOKU Mwiro, my begging bowl (pati), 
MOKU Mwiro, I am…’ (unnumbered tablet). 

This graph is used extensively to transcribe pa in Kojiki, as the following 
song demonstrates: 

KK 103 

夜須美斯志 yasumisisi During the morning 

和賀淤富岐美能 wa ga opokimi no our great lord of the heavenly 

阿佐斗爾波 asatwo nipa eighty [rays] of sunshine 

伊余理陀多志 iyoridatasi comes and stands, and 


由布斗爾波 yuputwo nipa during the evening 

伊余理陀多須 iyoridatasu he comes and stands. 

和岐豆岐賀斯多能 wakiduki ga sita no How I would like to be 

伊多爾母賀 ita nimo ga the board under 

阿世袁 ase wo his armrest, my love. 

This phonogram also appears through out Nihon shoki, appearing in 20 
annotational notes, and 80 poems: 罔象、此云美都波 ‘Deity of the water’ is 
read mitupa’ (NSG), 檍、此云阿波岐 ‘holm oak’ is read apagi’ (NSG), 毀、 
此云波那豆 ‘destroy’ is read panatu’ (NSG). 

NSK 67 

波那具波辭 panagupasi What beauty and detail 

佐區羅能梅涅 sakura no mede these cherry blossoms have. 

許等梅涅麼 kotomedeba If beauty is the same then 

波椰區波梅涅孺 payaku pa medezu I should have loved sooner: 

和我梅豆留古羅 wa ga meduru kwora my beloved little maidens. 

The phonogram 波 is also the primary graph used to transcribe pa in 
Man’yōshū, appearing 1575 times, more heavily in the phonogrammatic books of 
the anthology than in the others. 

MYS 11 

吾勢子波 WA GA seKWO pa If my beloved does not 

借廬作良須 KARIPO TUKUrasu have thatch for the roof 

草無者 KAYA NAKU PA of the hut he is building, 

小松下乃 KWOMATU GA MOTO no please cut some of the grass 

草乎苅核 KUSA wo KARASANE growing below the small pine. 

This is also the sole phonogram used to transcribe pa in the Footprints of the 
Buddha poetic sequence. 

BSS 14 

舍加乃美阿止 saka no miato I copy the footprints 

伊波尓宇都志於伎 ipa ni utusioki of Saka onto the stone, 

由伎米具利 yukimeguri and walk around it 

宇夜麻比麻都利 uyamapimaturi showing my reverence; 

和我与波乎閇牟 wa ga yo pa wopemu my generation will be complete. 

己乃与波乎閇牟 kono yo pa wopemu This time it will be complete. 

The cursive form of the graph 波 later yielded hiragana は. 

 

播 


OJ: pa OC: *pâih *pˤar-s § 

LH: pɑih EMC: pwâh GO: fa KN: fan 

NOM: vá, bệ SV: bá SK: pha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It is used to write the earliest 
transcription for 播磨 Parima Province. The reading of this as parima is 
underscored by the transcription 針間 NEEDLE-SPACE, PARI-MA, found in 
Kujiki. Some have believed that this is actually a two-graph representation of an 
originally older three-graph rendition (like 播利磨), but it should be noted that 
Baxter and Sagart reconstruct the Old Chinese form for 播 as *pˤar-s 
(2014:257–258). Schuessler compares 播 to Proto-Tibeto-Burman *bwâr, again 
suggesting that this phonogram originally had a liquid, thus providing the 


possibility that *par > *paih. If this theory is accurate, then 播磨 would have 
represented par-ma. 

This phonogram later is clearly used to transcribe pa, however, as the 
following examples show. On a number of mokkan we find 播豆郡 Patu 
District in the province of Mikapa (MK 368). Another mokkan contains 播多郷 
Pata Village (MKK 5:11). 

This phonogram is also used in Nihon shoki, eight times in the annotational 
notes, and 49 times in poetry: 葉木國、此云播擧矩爾 ‘Leaf-tree land’ is read 
pako kuni’ (NSG), 全剥、此云宇都播伎 ‘Peel completely off is read utupagi’ 
(NSG). 

NSK 3 

阿磨佐箇屢 amasakaru Having crossed over 

避奈菟謎廼 pinatu mye no the narrow, earthly straits, 

以和多邏素西渡 iwatarasu setwo the provincial maidens 

以嗣箇播箇柁輔智 isikapa kataputi stand on the banks of the river 

箇多輔智爾 kataputi ni on the banks of the Ishikawa, 

阿彌播利和柁嗣 ami pariwatasi spreading out their nets. 

妹慮豫嗣爾 mero yosi ni Pull in those nets 

豫嗣豫利據禰 yosi yorikone by pulling on the meshes! 

以嗣箇播箇柁輔智 isikapa kataputi On the banks of the Ishikawa. 

Also, the following poem in Man’yōshū, from the earliest part of the 
collection, contains this pa. 

MYS 69 

草枕 KUSA MAKURA If I had known that he 

客去君跡 TABWI YUKU KIMI TO was our lord on a journey, 

知麻世婆 SIRAmaseba with grass as his pillow, 

崖乃埴布尓 KWISI no PANIpu ni I would have dyed your 

仁寶播散麻思呼 nipopasamasi wo robes with the clay of the coast. 

 

幡 


OJ: pa OC: *phan 

LH: phuɑn EMC: phjwɐn GO: famu KN: fan 

NOM: phan SV: phan, phiên SK: pen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. On two different mokkan, we find a 
village called Pada. One is in Ki Province, written 幡陀郷, on a wooden 
fragment dated around the Tenpyō era (729–749), while another fragment dated 
around the era of Tenpyō Hōji (757–765) contains the village name transcribed 
as 幡太郷. 

This phonogram also appears in three songs in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 71 

阿摩儾霧 amadamu Flying in the sky 

箇留惋等賣 karu wotomye Princess Karu, 

異哆儺介麼 ita nakaba people will notice 

臂等資利奴陪瀰 pito sirinu bemi if I cry uncontrollably. 

幡舍能夜摩能 pasa no yama no I will be like the dove 

波刀能 patwo no of Mount Hasa 

資哆儺企迩奈勾 sita naki ni naku who coos in a soft voice. 


The editors of Jidai betsu kokugo daijiten (1967:898) claim that this 
phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū. It does appear in the reoccurring 
toponyms 因幡 inaba; other than that, several manuscripts have 幡 in two 
different poems (MYS 4092, 4111), but both examples are actually scribal errors 
for an earlier 播. 

 

破 


OJ: pa OC: *phâih 

LH: phɑih EMC: phwâh GO: fa KN: fa 

NOM: phá, vỡ SV: phá SK: pha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears as early as the Mino Census 
(702), in the name 不破 Pupa. It appears on a variety of mokkan, especially to 
transcribe Pupa District (不破評, MKK 13:154), a district in the province of 
Minwo (美濃国, MK 2899). There is also a personal name on one mokkan: 比売 
太利・破奈利古 Pimyedari and Panarikwo (MKK 20:35). 

This phonogram is also used rather extensively in Nihon shoki, appearing in 
two annotational notes, and 53 times in poetry: 顯齋、此云于圖詩怡破毘 
“ ‘spirit possession’ is read utusi ipapi” (NSG), 罔象女、此云瀰菟破廼迷 
“ ‘the female deity of the water’ is mitupa no mye” (NSG). 

NSK 42 

知破椰臂苔 tipaya pito Endowed with power 

于旎能和多利珥 udi no watari ni you potent people 

佐烏刀利珥 sawo twori ni who hold the staff. 

破揶鷄務臂苔辭 payakyemu pito si at the ferry of Uji— 

和餓毛胡珥虚務 wa ga mwokwo ni komu come rescue me, companions! 

The phonogram 破 also appears six times in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 632 

目二破見而 ME nipa MITE What to do with my beloved? 

手二破不所取 TE nipa TORAYENU She is like the cassia tree 

月内之 TUKWI NO UTI NO that is on the moon 

楓如 KATURA NO GOTOKI which you sees with your eyes, 

妹乎奈何責 IMWO wo IKA NI SEMU but cannot hold in your hand. 

 

方 


OJ: pa OC: *paŋ 

LH: puɑŋ EMC: pjwaŋ GO: fau KN: fau 

NOM: phương, vuông SV: phương SK: pang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears on a mokkan from the 
Fujiwara Palace ruins (fl. 694–710), which predate the establishment of the Nara 
Capital, in a personal name: 五百木部連方曽 IPOKWIBYE MURAZI Paso (MK 
1515). 

It is also used in the imperial edicts preserved in Shoku Nihongi, generally to 
represent the particle pa: 仲末呂可心乃逆仁惡状方知奴。然先仁之我奏之事方毎事仁 
姦美謟天在家利 NAKAmaro ga KOKORO no SAKASIMA ni ASIKISAMA pa SIRInu. SIKA 
AREBA SAKI ni Siga MAWOSIsi KOTO pa KOTOGOTO ni KADAmi PETURAPIte ARIkyeri 
‘We realize the evil intentions of the heart of Nakamaro. Because of this, the things 
that he had proclaimed earlier are completely false and fawning’ (SM 28). 


This phonogram also appears once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 3222 

三諸者 MIMOROPA Mount Mimoro 

人之守山 PITO NO MORU YAMA is a mountain people watch over. 

本辺者 MOTOPYE NIPA At the base of the mountain 

馬酔木花開 ASIBI PANA SAKI the andromeda blossoms, 

末辺方 SUWEPYE NIpa and at the tip of the mountain 

椿花開 TUBAKWI PANA SAKU the camellia is in bloom. 

浦妙 URAGUPASI What a beautiful mountain it is. 

山曽 YAMA so A mountain like one 

泣兒守山 NAKU KWO MORU YAMA who watches over a crying child. 

 

防 


OJ: pa OC: *baŋ 

LH: buɑŋ EMC: bjwaŋ GO: bau KN: fau 

NOM: phòng SV: phòng SK: pang 

Usage / History: 

See this usage under pwo. 

 

芳 


OJ: pa OC: *phaŋ 

LH: phuɑŋ EMC: phjwaŋ GO: fau KN: fau 

NOM: NA SV: phương SK: pang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in the place name supa as 
found in Kojiki and Nihon shoki, transcribed as 周芳, a transcription which 
mirrors that in Kujiki: 周防. The graph is also used to transcribe place names 
such as 阿利芳 aripa, and 安利芳 aripa. 

 

八 


OJ: pa, pati OC: *prêt 

LH: pɛt EMC: păt GO: fati KN: fatu 

NOM: bát SV: bát SK: phal 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in a name preserved in a 
document kept in Shōsōin: 八多 Pata, here apparently used for the final -t to 
show that the following vowel is short. Nihon shoki preserves the name 安八磨 
郡 Apatima District. Another name, 安八萬王 Prince Apatima, appears in 
Shoku Nihongi. This usage also appears four times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 762 

神左夫跡 KAMUsabu TO It is not because I have aged 

不欲者不有 INABU NIPA ARAZU that I have rejected you. 

八多也八多 pata ya pata Supposing, just suppose— 

如是為而後二 KAKU SITE NOTI ni shall I not be lonely 

佐夫之家牟可聞 sabusikyemu kamo after something like this? 

 

判 


OJ: pa OC: *phâns 

LH: phanh EMC: phwânh GO: fan KN: fan 

NOM: phán SV: phán SK: phan 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears on a mokkan in one name: 凡 
直判麻呂 OPOSI ATAPI Pamaro (MK 4525). 

 

胖 


OJ: pa OC: *phâns 

LH: phanh EMC: phwânh GO: fan KN: fan 

NOM: phán SV: phán SK: phan 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Bungo fudoki in this 
phrase: 用療痂癬謂胖太氣 ‘(The water) is used to cure scabies. Scabies is read 
padake.’ 

 

簸 


OJ: pa OC: *pâih or * pâiʔ 

LH: pɑih, paiʔ EMC: pwâh LMC: pua GO: fa KN: fa 

NOM: NA SV: bả, phả SK: pha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in Nihon shoki, six times in 
the annotational notes, and eight times in poetry: 柱、此云美簸旨邏 ‘Pillar’ is 
read mipasira’ (NSG), 麓、山足曰麓。此云簸耶磨 ‘Base of the mountain 
refers to the foot of the mountain. It is read payama’ (NSG). 

NSK 74 

飫瀰能古簸 omi no kwo pa The servant of the crown, 

多倍能波伽摩嗚 tape no pakama wo arranging his hemp trousers 

那々陛嗚絁 nanapye wo si and his seven-fold armor, 

儞播儞陀々始諦 nipa ni tatasite is standing out in the garden. 

阿遥比那陀須暮 ayepi nadasu mo He straightens his leg straps. 

 

泮 


OJ: pa OC: *phans 

LH: phɑnh EMC: phwânh LMC: phuan GO: fan KN: fan 

NOM: bận, bợn SV: phán SK: pan 

Usage / History: 

This usage belongs to LJS, appearing in two songs in Shoki: 

NSK 69 

和餓儺勾菟摩 wa ga naku tuma I cry for my spouse. 

去鐏去會 kozo koso It was last night 

椰主區泮娜布例 yasuku pada pure that our flesh calmly touched. 

 

絆 


OJ: pa OC: *pâns 

LH: panh EMC: phwân LMC: phuan GO: fan KN: fan 

NOM: bận SV: bán SK: pan 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only once in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 66 

佐瑳羅餓多 sasaragata Undo the string with 

迩之枳能臂毛弘 nisiki no pimwo wo the bamboo whisk design— 

等枳舎気帝 tokisakete that brocade string. 


阿麻多絆泥受迩 amata pa nezu ni I cannot spend many nights; 

多儾比等用能未 tada pito ywo nomwi let us spend but one night. 

 

婆 


OJ: pa OC: *bâi 

LH: bɑi EMC: bwâ LMC: pɦua GO: ba KN: fa 

NOM: bà SV: ba, bà SK: pha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram, when transcribing pa, belongs to the CBS. For the 
prenasalized version, see OJ: ba. 

This usage appears mainly in Nihon shoki, in two annotational notes, and 14 
times in poetry: 波賦武志謀 papu musi mo ‘even the crawling insects,’ 一本、 
以婆賦武志謀以下 ‘Another record has the following after papu musi mo… 
“even the crawling insects” ‘ (NSG). Notice that the original has 波 pa, while 
the annotational quote has 婆 pa. 

NSK 84 

野麻登陸儞 yamatopye ni What I long to see 

瀰我保指母能婆 migaposi mono pa is the palace of Tsunosashi, 

於尸農瀰能 osinumi no this fortress built so high 

莒能陀哿紀儺屢 kono takakwi naru in Oshinumi, in the vicinity 

都奴娑之能瀰野 tunwosasi no miya of the province of Yamato. 

This phonogram also appears in a variety of imperial edicts in Shoku 
Nihongi：男能未父名負弖女波伊婆礼奴物尓阿礼夜 WOTOKWO nomwi TITI [NO] NA 
OPITE MYENOKWO pa iparenu MONO ni are ya ‘Only men carry the names of their 
fathers, so are women merely things that have no connection?’(SM 13). There 
are also a number of times when papa ‘mother’ is written 婆婆 in the edicts (in 
SM 7, 13, 23, 25). 

Jidai betsu kokugo daijiten (1967:898) claims that 婆 is used to represent pa 
in Man’yōshū. Ōno (1977:586) says that 婆 used for pa is doubtful, but does not 
provide any other information. I have found one example, MYS 3356, where the 
final stanza is 氣尓餘婆受吉奴 ke ni yopazu kinu ‘I came without panting.’ The 
Nishi Honganji witness, which has been the exemplar for most scholars over the 
years, has 婆, but there are a few witnesses that have 波, so it is difficult to 
decide the archetype. 

 

房 


OJ: pa OC: *baŋ 

LH: buaŋ EMC: bjwaŋ LMC: fɦaŋ GO: bau KN: fau 

NOM: buồng, phóng SV: phóng SK: phang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in the toponyms 阿房 Apa. 
All other examples of this phonogram in Shoku Nihongi and Man’yōshū also 
represent this toponym. 

 

薄 


OJ: pa OC: *phâk 

LH: phak EMC: phâk LMC: pɦak GO: baku KN: faku 

NOM: bạc SV: bạc SK: pak 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This usage only appears in Man’yōshū, 
and then only five times. 

MYS 1420 

沫雪香 AWA YUKI KA Thinking that I see 

薄太礼尓零登 padare ni PURU to puffs of snow 

見左右二 MIRU MADE ni fluttering down. 

流倍散波 NAGARApe TIRU pa What flower is it 

何物之花其毛 NANI NO PANA so mo that is scattering its petals? 

 

泊 


OJ: pa OC: *bâk 

LH: bak EMC: bâk LMC: pɦak GO: baku KN: faku 

NOM: bạc SV: bạc SK: pak 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This phonogram is only found in 
Man’yōshū, appearing 15 times, all examples used to represent kapa ‘river,’ 
reflecting on the semantics of the graph ‘moor a boat.’ 

MYS 3605 

和多都美乃 watatumi no Only on the day when 

宇美尓伊弖多流 umi ni idetaru the Shikama River that empties 

思可麻河泊 sikamagapa into the ocean of the Sea Deity 

多延無日尓許曽 tayemu PI ni koso stops flowing 

安我故非夜麻米 a ga kwopwi yamame will my longing for you cease. 

 

盤 


OJ: pa OC: *bân 

LH: ban EMC: bwân LMC: pɦuan GO: bamu KN: fan 

NOM: bàn, mâm SV: bàn SK: pan 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This graph appears several times in 
Man’yōshū. The obvious example appears in MYS 933, in the stanzas: 鰒珠 / 
左盤尓潜出 APABI TAMA / sapa ni KADUKIDE ‘diving and bringing back many 
abalone jewels….’ The problematic example is found in MYS 2522: 恨登 / 思 
狭名盤 URAMESI to / OMOPU sapa ni ‘often I think how vexing…,’ where 盤 is 
supposedly used for pani. Recent scholarship, however, finds this reading to be 
suspicious, and since Sengaku provided no rendering for us, we are left with little 
other evidence. 

 

皤 


OJ: pa OC: *bai 

LH: bɑi EMC: ba LMC pɦua GO: ba KN: fa 

NOM: NA SV: bà SK: pen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears mainly in Nihon shoki, 
appearing four times in two songs. 

NSK 80 

婀拕羅斯枳 atarsiki Such a pitiful waste, 

偉儺謎能陀倶彌 winabye no tagumi that inking string used by 

柯該志須彌儺皤 kakesi suminapa the Inabe carpenter. 


旨我那稽麼 si ga nakyeba If he is no longer here, 

拕例柯々該武預 tare ka kakemu yo what skilled person will remain 

婀拕羅須彌儺皤 atara suminapa to use the inking string? 

This phonogram also appears once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 434 

加座皤夜能 kazapaya no The white azaleas 

美保乃浦廻之 mipo no URAMWI NO on the coastline of 

白管仕 SIRATUTUzi Miho with swift winds— 

見十方不怜 MIREdomo SABUSI I still feel empty, thinking of 

無人念者 NAKI PITO OMOPEBA the person who is no longer here. 

 

羽 


OJ: pa OC: *waʔ 

LH: waʔ EMC: wua GO: u KN: u 

NOM: vũ, võ SV: vũ SK: wu 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ pa ‘feather.’ It appears rather early in 
the Japanese corpus. It appears on a mokkan excavated from the Fujiwara Palace 
ruins (fl. 694–710), predating the Taihō Codes of 701: 尾治国羽栗評 WOPARI 
[NO] KUNI PAKURI KOPORI ‘District of Hakuri in the province of Owari.’ 

This usage also appears often in Kojiki, in names such as 羽山津見神 
PAYAMATUMI [NO] KAMWI ‘the deity Hayamatumi’ (KG), 尾 治 丹羽臣 
WOPARI taniPA OMI ‘the Omi of Tanba in Owari’ (KG), 羽咋君 PAGUPI [NO] 
KIMI ‘the Hagui Kimi’ (KG). This semantogram is used somewhat sparingly in 
Nihon shoki: 羽明玉 PAKARUTAMA ‘the deity Hakarutama’ (NSG), 羽振苑 
PAPURI SONO ‘garden of Hafuri’ (NSG), and 高羽川上 TAKAPA [NO] 
KAPAKAMI ‘upstream of the Takaha River’ (NSG). 

There are roughly 40 examples to be found in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 12 

或頭云 Another manuscript has the beginning as: 

吾欲 WA GA PORISI But I have seen Kojima, 

子嶋羽見遠 KWO SIMA PA MISI wo which I had wanted to see… 

 

齒 


OJ: pa OC: *k-hjəʔ 

LH: tśhəʔ EMC: tśhɨʔ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: xỉ SV: xỉ SK: chi 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ pa ‘teeth.’ It appears a few times in 
Kojiki, as in the following names: 道之長乳齒神 MITI NO NAGATI PA [NO] 
KAMWI ‘the deity Nagachiha of the path’ (KG), and 蝮之水齒別命 TADIPI NO 
MIDUPA WAKE [NO] MIKOTO Prince Mizuha of Tajihi’ (KG). 

There are a few examples of this semantogram in Nihon shoki, in names such 
as 水齒郎媛 MIDUPA [NO] IRATUMYE ‘Princess Mizuha’ (NSG), 瑞齒別天皇 
MIDUPA WAKE [NO] SUMYERA MIKOTO ‘Great Ruler Mizuha Wake’ (NSG). 

This kungana also appears 11 times in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 1135 

氏河齒 UDIKAPA PA It appears that there is 

与杼湍無之 yodoSE NAKARAsi no shallow spot in Uji River. 


阿自呂人 aziro PITO I can hear the voices of people 

舟召音 PUNE YWOBAPU KOWE at the fishing weir here and 

越乞所聞 WOTI KOTI KIKOYU there calling for the boat. 

This kungana also appears once in Harima fudoki, in 大 御 津 齒 命 
OPOMITUPA [NO] MIKOTO ‘the deity Ōmituha.’ It also appears once in the Hizen 
fudoki in the following note: 土齒池、俗言岸爲比遲波 ‘PIDIPA Pond, people 
in this area call the bank of a river pidipa.’ 

 

葉 


OJ: pa OC: *lap or *lep 

LH: jap EMC: jiäp GO: efu KN: efu 

NOM: diệp, giấp, xẹp SV: diệp SK: yep 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ pa ‘leaf.’ The earliest datable usage 
appears in the Mino Census of 702: 木葉賣 KWIPAmye. Jidai betsu kokugo 
jiten (1967:899) claims this semantogram appears in Kojiki, and I have found a 
single example, 葉広熊 PABIROKUMA appears to be a strictly semantogrammatic 
usage, ‘big like a broad leaf.’ 

This kungana does appear in Nihon shoki: 葉木国野 PAKOKUNINWO, 
the name of a deity (NSG), and 葉田 PADA, a surname (NSG). 

This usage appears in Man’yōshū 13 times. 

MYS 705 

葉根蘰 PANEKADURA In a dream I saw 

今為妹乎 IMA SURU IMWO wo the young maiden who 

夢見而 IME NI MITE now wears the coming of age 

情内二 KOKORO NO UTI ni hair ornament, and in my heart 

戀渡鴨 KWOPWI WATARU KAMO I continue to long for her. 

 

者 


OJ: pa OC: *taʔ 

LH: tśaʔ EMC: tśjaʔ GO: sia KN: sia 

NOM: giả SV: giả SK: cya 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ pa a topic marker, or focus particle. 
This usage appears a few times in Man’yōshū. The following example contains 
者 once as a kungana, and then once as a topic marker. 

MYS 3800 

者田為々寸 PADA SUSUKI Like pampas grass 

穂庭莫出 PO NIPA NA IDE TO against my skin, my heart 

思而有 OMOPITARU realizes that I should not let 

情者所知 KOKORO PA SIRAYU my feelings show on my face. 

我藻将依 WARE MO YORINAMU I will come over to you. 

 

博 


OJ: paka OC: *pâk 

LH: pak EMC: pâk GO: faku KN: faku 

NOM: bác, bạc SV: bác SK: pak 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in a document preserved in 
Shōsōin in the name 田邊博多 TAbye Pakata, which name is also written as 


田邊博太. A mokkan from the Nara Captial contains the toponyms 曽博郷 
Sopaka Village (MK 343). Kojiki contains one example of this phonogram in the 
toponyms 掖上博多山 Mount Pakata in WAKIGAMI (KG). There are five 
examples of this phonogram in Nihon shoki, but these are limited to two 
toponyms: 博多 Pakata (NSG), and 博麻 Pakama (NSG). 

 

伯 


OJ: paka OC: *prâk 

LH: pak EMC: pɐk LMC: pa:jk GO: fiyaku KN: faku 

NOM: bác, bạc SV: bác SK: pak 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in the Mino Census of 702, 
in the name 伯麻呂 Paka Maro. A document in Shōsōin also has the name 大 
伴小伯 OPOTOMO WOpaka. This usage also appears on a variety of mokkan. 
The name Paka Maro appears a number of times, written variously as 伯麻呂 
(MK 12836) and 伯末呂 (MKK 5:86). The better known usage, however, is of 
the province name 伯耆国 Papagi, which is written as 伯岐 in Kujiki. 

 

法 


OJ: papu OC: *pap 

LH: puap EMC: pjwɐp LMC: fa:p GO: fofu KN: fafu 

NOM: phắp, phép SV: pháp SK: phep 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears on an epitaph dated the third 
year of Wadō (710), representing the toponyms 法美郡 Papumi District. This 
phonogram also appears in Harima fudoki in 法太里 Papuda Village. 

 

閉 


OJ: pe OC: *pît(s) 

LH: pes, pet EMC: pieih, piet GO: fei KN: fei 

NOM: bế, bé, bấy SV: bế SK: phyey, pyel 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The oldest datable example appears in 
the Taihō Census of 702. In the Mino Census we find names such as 多閉賣 
Tapemye, 古閉 Kwope, and 意閉賣 Opemye. This phonogram appears 35 
times in the liturgies: 御服波明多閇照多閇、和多閇荒多閇爾仕奉弖 MISO pa 
AKARUtape TERUtape NIKItape ARAtape ni TUKAPEMATURIte “As for the clothing 
(we will make) fabric that is brilliant, glowing, soft, and coarse…” (NT 2). This 
phonogram appears on a few excavated wooden tablets: 羅久於母閉皮 -raku 
omope pa ‘as for thinking about…’ (MK 730), 奈閉 nape ‘a seedling?’ 
(unnumbered tablet). 

This phonogram is the sole phonogram used in Kojiki to transcribe pe in 
poetry: 

KK 100 

爾比那閇夜爾 nipinapeya ni At the palace of 

淤斐陀弖流 opwidateru the First Fruits thickly grows 

毛毛陀流 mwomwodaru a zelkova tree 

都紀賀延波 tukwigaye pa with its many branches, 

本都延波 pwotuye pa the top branches 

阿米袁淤幣理 ame wo opyeri spreading out to cover the sky. 


This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, twice in the annotational notes, 
and three times in song: 齊此云牟吾閉 “ ‘(The name) 齊’ is read mugwope” 
(NSG). It also is used in the name Ape: 阿閉臣 Ape OMI. 

NSK 43 

智破揶臂等 tipaya pito Very powerful 

于旎能和多利珥 udi no watari ni those catalpa trees 

和多利涅珥 wataride ni standing by the bank 

多氐屢 tateru of the ferry. 

阿豆瑳由瀰摩由瀰 adusayumi mayumi To make a true catalpa bow, 

伊枳羅牟苔 ikiramu to I thought in my heart, 

虚々呂破望閉耐 kokoro pa mopedo to cut down a catalpa tree. 

伊斗羅牟苔 itworamu to I thought in my heart 

虚々呂破望閉耐 kokoro pa mopedo to hold one of those trees. 

望苔幣破 motopye pa I thought of you 

枳瀰烏於望臂涅 kimi wo omopide at the trunk of the tree. 

須慧幣破 suwepye pa I remembered you 

伊暮烏於望比涅 imo wo omopide when I looked up at the crown. 

伊羅那鷄區 iranakyeku I felt such sorrow 

曾虚珥於望比 soko ni omopi thinking of you there. 

伽那志鷄區 kanasikyeku I felt such sadness 

虚々珥於望臂 koko ni omopi thinking about you here. 

伊枳羅儒層區屢 ikirazu so kuru I left without cutting down 

阿豆瑳由瀰摩由瀰 adusayumi mayumi the tree for the catalpa bow. 

This phonogram also appears 14 times in Man’yōshū, as the following 
example illustrates: 

MYS 1782 

雪己曾波 YUKI koso pa Surely the snow will have 

春日消良米 PARUPI KIYUrame disappeared on a spring day. 

心佐閇 KOKORO sape Because you likely will have 

消失多列夜 KIYE USEtare ya disappeared even from my heart, 

言母不往来 KOTO mo KAYWOPANU having no news from you. 

This graph is also used exclusively for pe in the Footprints of the Buddha 
poetic sequence: 

BSS 20 

伊加豆知乃 ikaduti no Like the flash 

比加利乃期止岐 pikari no gotoki of lightning, 

己礼乃微波 kore no mwi pa this body is always 

志尓乃於保岐美 sini no opokimi accompanied by 

都祢尓多具覇利 tune ni tagupyeri the great lord of death; 

於豆閇可良受夜 odu pekarazu ya should we not be frightened? 

This last example should be read bekarazu, but I have not been able to find 
other examples where 閉 is read be. One of two possibilities exist: the reader 
would naturally prenasalize pe in reading (following odu), or this is an example 
of an earlier form of later beki, though this possibility is weaker because of a lack 
of supporting evidence. 

 


閇 


OJ: pe OC: *pît(s) 

LH: pes, pet EMC: pieih, piet GO: fei KN: fei 

NOM: bế, bé, bấy SV: bế SK: phyey, pyel 

Usage / History: 

This is a variant graph for 閉 pe (see above). 

 

拜 


OJ: pe OC: *prêts 

LH: pɛs EMC: păih GO: fai KN: fai 

NOM: bái SV: bái SK: poy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Nara era documents, but 
only to write the surname Ape 阿拜 or 安拜. It also appears on a number of 
mokkan: 播多郷拝志里 Pata Village Pesi Hamlet (unnumbered tablet), 丹波国 
何鹿郡拝師郷 Tanipa Province IKARUka District Pesi Village (MKK 9:12), 
and 伊賀国阿拝郡 Iga Province Ape District (unnumbered tablet). 

It also appears once in Man’yōshū to write the following: MYS 913 川津鳴 
奈拜 KAPADU NAKU nape ‘along with the frogs croaking....’ The nape here is 
difficult to interpret. If this is a particle, its use in the poem is difficult to figure 
out; thus, most modern scholars see 拜 as a mistake for 利 (or perhaps 理). If 
this is true, then this graph would not be present in Man’yōshū. More work needs 
to be conducted. 

 

倍 


OJ: pe OC: *bə̂ ʔ 

LH: bəʔ EMC: bwậiʔ LMC: pɦuaj GO: bai KN: fai 

NOM: bội, vội SV: bội SK: poy, phay 

Usage / History: 

The phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears four times in the annotational 
notes, and nine times in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 船枻、此云浮那能倍 
“ ‘bow of a ship’ is read puna no pe” (NSG). 

NSK 102 

訶之胡瀰弖 kasokwomite In reverence 

菟伽倍摩都羅武 tukapematuramu we will serve the throne. 

烏呂餓瀰弖 worogamite Prostrate on the ground 

菟伽倍摩都羅武 tukapematuramu we will serve the throne. 

宇多豆紀摩都流 utadukwimaturu I present this song. 

This phonogram also appears in Nara era documents, such as the imperial 
edicts in Shoku Nihongi (senmyō): 白賜倍婆 MAWOSI TAMApeba ‘when we 
declare...’ (SM 6). 

In Man’yōshū this is the primary phonogram used to transcribe pe, appearing 
188 times in the anthology: 

MYS 53 

藤原之 PUDIPARA NO How envious I am 

大宮都加倍 OPOMIYA tukape of the maidens 

安礼衝哉 areTUKU YA born to serve in 

處女之友者 WOTOMYE NO TOMO PA the great palace 

乏吉呂賀聞 TOMOSIkiro kamo of Fujiwara. 

See the same graph under OJ be. 


 

陪 


OJ: pe OC: *bə̂ 

LH: bə EMC: bwậi LMC: pɦuaj GO: bai KN: fai 

NOM: bồi SV: bồi SK: poy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and it appears once in the annotational 
notes and 11 times in the song of Nihon shoki: 御甂、此云彌那陪 “ ‘a pan (for 
frying fish)’ is read minape.” 

NSK 97 

美母慮我紆陪儞 mimoro ga upe ni (Music) will reach to the top 

能朋梨陀致 noporitati of Mount Mimoro. 

倭我彌細麼 wa ga miseba When I gaze down 

都奴娑播符 tunusapapu on Iware Pond, 

以簸例能伊開能 ipare no ike no with rocks covered in vines 

美那矢駄府 minasitapu even the fish 

紆鳴謨 uwo mo come to the surface 

紆陪儞堤々那皚矩 upe ni dete nageku and lament your passing. 

This phonogram also appears in the imperial edicts: 盧舎那仏乃慈賜比福 
波陪 rusiana POTOKE no UTUKUSIBI TAMApi SAKIpape ‘Bless us by bestowing 
the mercy of the Rushana Buddha on us...’ (SM 12). 

 

背 


OJ: pe OC: *bə̂ kh 

LH: bəh EMC: bwậi LMC: pɦuaj GO: bai KN: fai 

NOM: bối, bội SV: bối SK: poy, phay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, appearing once in Nihon shoki, in the 
annotational notes: 嚴瓮、此云怡途背 “ ‘sacred jugs’ are read itupe” (NSG). 

 

杯 


OJ: pe OC: *pə̂ 

LH: pə EMC: pwậi LMC: puaj GO: fai KN: fai 

NOM: bôi SV: bôi SK: poy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears only in Nihon shoki, once 
in an annotational note, and three times in poetry: 棄戸、此云須多杯 “ ‘throw 
away’ is read sutape” (NSG). 

NSK 107 

伊波能杯儞 ipa no pe ni On top of a rock 

古佐屢渠梅野倶 kwosaru kome yaku a cute monkey cooks rice. 

渠梅多儞母 kome dani mo Come and eat the rice 

多礙底騰裒囉栖 tagete toporase then go on through, 

歌麻之之能烏膩 kamasisi no wodi you old goat. 

 

俳 


OJ: pe OC: *brə̂ i 

LH: bɛi EMC: băi LMC: pɦa:j GO: bai KN: fai 

NOM: bài, vài SV: bài SK: poy 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears only in Nihon shoki, but 
only once in the annotational notes: 湌泉之竃、此云譽母都俳遇比 “ ‘hearth 
of the underworld’ is read yomotu pegupi” (NSG). 

 

沛 


OJ: pe OC: *pâts 

LH: pɑs EMC: pwâih LMC: phuaj GO: fai KN: fai 

NOM: phai, phảy, phới SV: phái, bái SK: phay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears once in a song in Nihon 
shoki: 

NSK 64 

於朋佐箇珥 oposaka ni I met a young maiden 

阿布夜烏等謎烏 apu ya wotomye wo on my way to Ōsaka. 

瀰知度沛麼 miti twopeba I asked the way— 

哆駄珥破能邏摩孺 tada ni pa norazu she did not say go straight. 

哆𡺸摩知烏能流 tagimati wo noru She said take the Tagima Road. 

 

珮 


OJ: pe OC: *bêh 

LH: bəh EMC: bwậi LMC: pɦuaj GO: bai KN: fai 

NOM: NA SV: bội SK: phay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears in one song in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 6 

阿軻娜磨廼 akadama no The radiant globe 

比訶利播阿利登 pikari pa ari to is wonderfully brilliant, 

比鄧播伊珮耐 pito pa ipedo so people may say, 

企弭我譽贈比志 kimi ga yosopisi but I have now realized 

多輔妬勾阿利計利 taputwoku arikyeri your brilliance is the finest. 

 

戸 


OJ: pe OC: *ɡâʔ 

LH: ɡɑʔ > ɡɔ EMC: ɣuoʔ GO: go KN: ko 

NOM: hộ, họ, hụ SV: hộ SK: hwo 

Usage / History: 

This kungana is explained under OJ: two as representing ‘door,’ but here it 
represents ‘house’ or ‘census,’ as pe was used as a counter for houses. The 
earliest datable use of this kungana is in the Mino Census of 702: 尾治戸稲寸女 
WOPARIPE INAKIMYE, and in the Chikuzen Census from the say time: 飛鳥戸 
ASUKAPE. 

This usage appears very rarely in Kojiki, one example is the potent phrase 黄 
泉戸喫 YOMOTUPEGUPI ‘eating of the hearth of the underworld.’ It is also used 
very sparingly in Nihon shoki, 飛 鳥戸 ASUKAPE (NSG) and 社戸臣 
KOSOPE OMI (NSG). A few examples are also found in Man’yōshū: 斎戸乎 
IPAPIPE wo ‘sacred jars’ (MYS 379), 言齒五十戸常 KOTO PA IPEDO ‘though 
I say this or that...’ (MYS 674). 

 


綜 


OJ: pe OC: *tsûŋh 

LH: tsouŋh EMC: tsuoŋh GO: so KN: sou 

NOM: NA SV: tộng, tống SK: cong 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ pe ‘warp, as in weaving cloth.’ This 
usage appears in Nihon shoki, in examples such as the name 大綜麻杵 
OPOPESWOKI (NSG). The same usage appears in Kujiki. This graph also 
appears once in a Man’yōshū poem: 綜麻 形 乃 PESWO KATA no ‘At 
Hesokata…’ (MYS 19). 

 

經 


OJ: pe OC: *kêŋ 

LH: keŋ EMC: kɛjŋ GO: kiau KN: kei 

NOM: kinh SV: kinh SK: kyeng 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ the infinitive of the verb pu ‘set up a 
warp.’ This usage appears in Man’yōshū: 奥真經而 OKU MAPETE ‘to the very 
depths’ (MYS 1024); 名蘇經乍見武 NAswoPETUTU MImu ‘I will gaze (at the 
flower) as I compare it to you’ (MYS 1448). 

 

甕 


OJ: pe OC: *ʔôŋh 

LH: ʔoŋh EMC: ʔuŋh GO: u KN: wou 

NOM: ống, SV: ống, ung, úng, ủng SK: wong 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the read OJ pe ‘sacred jar.’ This complicated graph 
is often abbreviated to 瓮. This kungana appears twice in Nihon shoki: 吾瓮海 
人烏摩呂 APE AMA Womaro (NSG), 穗瓮君 瓮、此云倍 POPE [NO] KIMI, 
瓮 ‘sacred jug’ is to be read pe (NSG). 

 

缻 


OJ: pe OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: kwan GO: kuwan KN: kuwan 

NOM: quán SV: quán SK: kwan 

Usage / History: 

This extremely rare usage is a kungana, calling to mind OJ pe ‘jar.’ This 
phonogram is a simplified form of 罐. This usage is only found once in 
Man’yōshū, in the place name 木缻之宮乎 KWIPE NO MIYA wo ‘(who founded) 
the Kihe Palace…’ (MYS 196). 

 

卑 


OJ: pi < pe OC: *pe 

LH: pie EMC: pjie GO: fi KN: fi 

NOM: ti, te SV: ti SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, and I have argued that this is a 
derogatory graph inserted by the Chinese historiographical office (2008:7). This 
graph appears in the titles of the queen of Wa and her enemy neighbor king: 卑 
弥呼 *pe-me-ho, and 卑弥弓呼 *pe-me-kuŋ-ho. This phonogram also appears 
in the chieftain title 卑狗 *pe-kɔ. The usage of this graph is also found in an 


inscription on the peninsula. It appears on the Koguryŏ epitaph of Moturu: 鮮卑 
□濊使人 ‘Sian-pie-X, a messenger from Wai.’ 

Because of the derogatory nature of the graph—卑 means ‘base’ or 
‘vular’—this graph appears somewhat infrequently in the OJ corpus. This graph 
appears twice on excavated wooden tablets, but only one has enough information 
to be of any value: 卑志釘 pisiKUGI ‘rhombus nail (a nail with the head in the 
shape of a rhombus’ (MK 5). 

In Kojiki this graph appears once, in the name 天之菩卑能命 AME NO 
Pwopi no MIKOTO (KG). In Nihon shoki this graph is used to transcribe pi twice, 
once in an annotational note, and once in a song: 饒速日、此云儞藝波椰卑 
“ ‘Nigi Hayahi’ is read nigi payapi” (NSG). 

NSK 18 

於朋耆妬庸利 opotwo ywori Occupying himself 

于介伽卑氐 ukagapite with a princess, 

許呂佐務苔 korosamu to he in unaware 

須羅句塢志羅珥 suraku wo sirani that someone spies a chance 

比賣那素寐須望 pimye naswobisu mo from the large gate to kill him. 

This phonogram appears once in Man’yōshū, but it is not noted in Ōno 
(1977:589): 

MYS 846 

可須美多都 kasumi tatu Mist rises on this 

那我岐波流卑乎 nagaki parupi wo long spring day— 

可謝勢例杼 kazaseredo I have stuck a sprig of 

伊野那都可子岐 iya natukasiki plum blossom in my hair, but 

烏梅能波那可毛 ume no pana kamo how I long for those plums. 

 

比 


OJ: pi OC: *piʔ 

LH: piʔ EMC: piʔ GO: bi KN: fi 

NOM: tỉ SV: tỉ, tí SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Kwangkaytho stele: 
豆比鴨 岑 韓 *doh-piʔ-ʔap-dzim-gɑn (kɑr), 比利 城 *piʔ-ri fortress. This 
phonogram also appears on the Silla King Cin-hung stele commemorating his 
hunt in Hamcyu (568 CE), in a name: 喙部服冬智大阿干比知夫知 *puktouŋpiʔtibuti 
of the fifth rank, belonging to the *tśuas (first) District. This phonogram 
is also preserved in the inscription on the Inariyama tumulus sword (ca. fifth 
century), 意富比垝 *opo-pikwa-i and 半弖比(垝) *pante-pi(kwa-i). 

This graph appears in Suiko era texts, writing names such as: 比里古 
Pirikwo, 伊斯比女 Isi Pimye ‘Princess Ishi,’ 止余美気加志支夜比売天皇 
Toyo Mike Kasikiya Pimye [NO]SUMYERA [NO] MIKOTO ‘Great Ruler Toyo Mike 
Kashikiya Hime (Suiko).’ 

The earliest datable relic which uses this phonogram is from a mokkan dated 
the ninth month of what would be the year 694: 知田評阿具比里 Agupi 
Village in TiTA District (of Owari Province, MK 162). This phonogram is used 
in the liturgies 56 times, though some double as a prenasalized version: 参入罷 
出人能選比所知志神等能伊須呂許比阿禮比坐乎 MAWIRIDURU PITO no 
ERAbiSIRAsi KAMWITATI no isurokopi arebi MASU wo “…who has authority over 


the selection (of good and evil) of the people who enter and leave the palace and 
(rectifies) the terror and violence of the deities…” (NT 8). 

This is the primary graph used to transcribe pi in Kojiki: 

KK 47 

本牟多能 pomuta no Ōsazaki, 

比能美古 pi no mikwo the august son 

意富佐邪岐 oposazaki of the sun of Homuta! 

意富佐邪岐 oposazaki Yes, Ōsazaki— 

波加勢流多知 pakaseru tati the sword that he wears 

母登都流藝 moto turugi dangles at his waist, 

須惠布由 suwe puyu and the tip sways back and forth. 

布由紀能 puyukwi no Back and forth 

須加良賀志多紀能 sukara ga sitakwi no like leaves falling to the ground 

佐夜佐夜 saya saya below the barren winter trees. 

Reminiscent of Kojiki, which tends to favor one graph per syllable, the 
Footprints of the Buddha poems also use 比 exclusively to transcribe pi: 

BSS 1 

美阿止都久留 miato tukuru The resounding sound of 

伊志乃比鼻伎波 isi no pibiki pa the rock where the footprints 

阿米尓伊多利 ame ni itari are carved reaches to heaven; 

都知佐閇由須礼 tuti sape yusure the earth even reverberates. 

知々波々賀多米尓 titi papa ga tame ni For father and mother— 

毛呂比止乃多米尓 moropito no tame ni for all people. 

Nihon shoki also uses this phonogram 14 times in the annotational notes and 
62 times song: 大日孁貴、此云於保比屢咩能武智 ‘(The name of the deity) 
Ōhirume no muchi is read opopirume no muti’ (NSG), 泉津平坂、此云余母都 
比羅佐可 ‘The flat plain of Yomi is read yomotu pirasaka’ (NSG), 蘿、此云比 
舸礙 ‘Club moss is read pikage’ (NSG). 

NSK 94 

播屢 parupi We went by Kasuga, 

箇須我嗚須擬 kasuga wo sugwi written ‘spring-day.’ 

逗摩御慕屢 tumagomoru We traveled through 

嗚佐裒嗚須擬 wosapo wo sugwi Osaho, the hidden wife. 

拕摩該儞播 tamake nipa On the jeweled ritual plate 

伊比佐倍母理 ipi sape mori we piled rice high. 

拕摩慕比儞 tamamopi ni The jeweled ritual cup 

瀰逗佐倍母理 midu sape mori we filled with water. 

儺岐曾裒遲喩倶謀 nakisopoti yuku mo On goes the procession, 

柯㝵比謎阿婆例 kage pimye apare weeping and wet; poor 

 Kagehime. 

This phonogram is the principal graph used in Man’yōshū to represent pi, 
used 636 times. 

MYS 479 

波之吉可聞 pasiki kamo How distressing! 

皇子之命乃 MIKWO NO MIKOTO no The road to Ikuzi 

安里我欲比 arigaywopi that the august prince 


見之活道乃 MESIsi IKUDI no had always traveled down 

路波荒尓鷄里 MITI pa AREnikyeri has been abandoned. 

This graph is later simplified to represent katakana ヒ. 

 

必 


OJ: pi OC: *pit 

LH: pit EMC: pjiet GO: fiti KN: fitu 

NOM: tất SV: tất SK: phil 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. In the earliest known examples with this 
phonogram used as a phonogram, it appears to have been selected to represent pi 
plus a second syllable with an alveolar. The earliest known example appears in 
personal names, such as 必登 Pito, 訓志必登 Kusipito, 必志 Pisi. On a 
mokkan fragment we find this place name: 近江国□□郡必佐郷 APUMI [NO] 
KUNI, XX District, Pisa Village (MKK 11:23). 

This graph is generally avoided in most texts, because of its grammatical 
function in Chinese, 必 ‘surely, certainly.’ I have found one example in Nihon 
shoki, though there is some textual confusion: 

NSK 92 

擧騰我瀰儞 kotogami ni The shadow of the zither 

枳謂屢箇皚必謎 kiwiru kagepimye above my beloved-to-be— 

拕摩儺羅磨 tama naraba if she were a jewel, 

婀我裒屢柁摩能 a ga poru tama no she would be my favorite kind: 

婀波寐之羅陀魔 apabisiratama a white pearl from an abalone. 

Some manuscripts of Nihon shoki have 必謎 in the second stanza as 比謎, 
where there has been confusion between 必 and 比. I have followed the NKBT 
editors in seeing 必 as the archetype (Ienaga et al. 1986.2:605). 

This usage is most prominent in Man’yōshū, where it appears 13 times in 
phonetic script, and which seven, or over half, follow the pattern noted above: 
必 is followed by an alveolar. Consider two examples: 

MYS 850 

由吉能伊呂遠 yuki no iro wo Stealing the color 

有婆比弖佐家流 ubapite sakyeru of the snow as they bloom, 

有米能波奈 ume no pana the plum blossoms 

伊麻佐加利奈利 ima sakari nari are now at their best— 

弥牟必登母我聞 mimu pito mo ga mo if only people could see them. 

MYS 872 

夜麻能奈等 yama no na to Wanting to pass on 

伊賓都夏等可母 ipitugye to kamo the name of this mountain— 

佐用比賣何 saywopimye ga could it be that Princess Sayo 

許能野麻能閇仁 kono yama no pe ni is on the mountain top 

必例遠布利家牟 pire wo purikyemu waving her scarf? 

 

賓 


OJ: pi OC: *pin 

LH: pin EMC: pjien GO: fimu KN: fin 

NOM: tân SV: tân SK: pin 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears twice in Man’yōshū. 


MYS 872 

夜麻能奈等 yama no na to Wanting to pass on 

伊賓都夏等可母 ipitugye to kamo the name of this mountain— 

佐用比賣何 saywopimye ga could it be that Princess Sayo 

許能野麻能閇仁 kono yama no pe ni is on the mountain top 

必例遠布利家牟 pire wo purikyemu waving her scarf? 

 

臂 


OJ: pi OC: *pekh 

LH: pieh EMC: pjieh LMC: pji GO: fi KN: fi 

NOM: NA SV: tí SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears 17 times in the poetry of 
Shoki: 

NSK 43 

智破揶臂等 tipaya pito Very powerful 

于旎能和多利珥 udi no watari ni those catalpa trees 

和多利涅珥 wataride ni standing by the bank 

多氐屢 tateru of the ferry. 

阿豆瑳由瀰摩由瀰 adusayumi mayumi To make a true catalpa bow, 

伊枳羅牟苔 ikiramu to I thought in my heart, 

虚々呂破望閉耐 kokoro pa mopedo to cut down a catalpa tree. 

伊斗羅牟苔 itworamu to I thought in my heart 

虚々呂破望閉耐 kokoro pa mopedo to hold one of those trees. 

望苔幣破 motopye pa I thought of you 

枳瀰烏於望臂涅 kimi wo omopide at the trunk of the tree. 

須慧幣破 suwepye pa I remembered you 

伊暮烏於望比涅 imo wo omopide when I looked up at the crown. 

伊羅那鷄區 iranakyeku I felt such sorrow 

曾虚珥於望比 soko ni omopi thinking of you there. 

伽那志鷄區 kanasikyeku I felt such sadness 

虚々珥於望臂 koko ni omopi thinking about you here. 

伊枳羅儒層區屢 ikirazu so kuru I left without cutting down 

阿豆瑳由瀰摩由瀰 adusayumi mayumi the tree for the catalpa bow. 

This phonogram appears once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 1783 

松反 MATUGAPYERI Waiting your return 

四臂而有八羽 sipiTE ARE ya PA have you become dumb? 

三栗 MITUGURI NO You do not come to court 

中上不来 NAKA NOBORIKONU to make your middle report, 

麻呂等言八子 maro to IPU YATUKWO the servant known as Maro. 

 

避 


OJ: pi OC: *bekh 

LH: bieh EMC: bjieh LMC: pɦji GO: bi KN: fi 

NOM: tị SV: tị SK: phi 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears five times only in Nihon 
shoki song. In NSK 2 it is used to transcribe the name of a deity: 阿泥素企多伽 
避顧禰, Adi Suki Takapikwone (NSG). 

NSK 3 

阿磨佐箇屢 amasakaru Having crossed over 

避奈菟謎廼 pinatu mye no the narrow, earthly straits, 

以和多邏素西渡 iwatarasu setwo the provincial maidens 

以嗣箇播箇柁輔智 isikapa kataputi stand on the banks of the river 

箇多輔智爾 kataputi ni on the banks of Ishikawa, 

阿彌播利和柁嗣 ami pariwatasi spreading out their nets. 

妹慮豫嗣爾 mero yosi ni Pull in those nets 

豫嗣豫利據禰 yosi yorikone by pulling on the meshes! 

以嗣箇播箇柁輔智 isikapa kataputi On the banks of the Ishikawa. 

 

毘 


OJ: pi OC: *bi 

LH: bi EMC: bi LMC: pɦji GO: bi KN: fi 

NOM: NA SV: tì, bì SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, as the voiced initial has devoiced by the 
Late Middle Chinese period. I have found one example of this in Kojiki. 

KK 73 

那賀美古夜 na ga mikwo ya Surely a wild goose has laid 

都毘迩斯良牟登 tupi ni siramu to an egg, showing the posterity of 

加理波古牟良斯 kari pa kwomurasi your highness will reign forever. 

This phonogram representing pi is seen primarily in Nihon shoki, where it 
appears 23 times in annotational notes, and eight times in poetry: 皇産靈、此云 
美武須毘 ‘Imperial binding spirit’ is read mimusupi’ (NSG), 赤梼、此云伊知 
毘 “(The personal name) ‘red-block of wood’ is to be read itipi” (NSG). 

NSK 11 

愛瀰詩烏 emisi wo The barbarian 

毘儾利 pidari having been insulted— 

毛々那比苔 mwomwo napi to though people say 

比苔破易陪廼毛 pito pa ipedomo they have seen a 100 battles 

多牟伽毘毛勢儒 tamukapi mo sezu these do not even resist. 

There are other examples of this character in the early Nara corpus which has 
led some scholars to theorize that 毘 was also used as pi outside of Nihon shoki. 
Consider these examples from mokkan: 神護三年正月八日…□□□毘登 
‘Third year of Jingo (767), first month, eighth day XXX pito (bito)…” (MK 4), 
(田)毘登稲麻 Tapito (Tabito) INASA (MK 4512), 正八位下和毘登 Wapito 
(Wabito) of the True Eighth rank lower…; □毘登□虫 年六十 ‘Xpito XMUSI, 
age 60’ (MK 7592). As these examples show, it is difficult to know if this should 
be pi or bi. While the evidence is inconclusive, at this stage I would rather opt for 
the EMC reading of bi for these examples (which see). 


譬 


OJ: pi OC: *phekh 

LH: phieh EMC: phjieh LMC: phji GO: fi KN: fi 

NOM: ví, thí SV: thí, tỉ, tỷ SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It is found once in an annotational note, 
and ten times in song in Nihon shoki: 誓約之中、此云宇氣譬能美儺箇 ‘in the 
middle of making a vow’ is to be read ukepi no minaka’ (NSG). 

NSK 103 

摩蘇餓豫 maswoga yo Truly you are the Swoga, 

蘇餓能古羅破 swoga no kwora pa the posterity of the Swoga— 

宇摩奈羅麼 uma naraba if you were horses, 

譬武伽能古摩 pimuka no kwoma then steeds of Himuka you would be. 

多智奈羅麼 tati naraba If you were swords, 

勾禮能摩差比 kure no masapi then blades of Koguryŏ you would be. 

宇倍之訶茂 ubesi kamo How true this is. 

蘇餓能古羅烏 swoga no kwora wo That must be why 

於朋枳瀰能 opokimi no the posterity of the Swoga 

菟伽破須羅志枳 tukapasurasiki serve the great lord. 

Likely this graph was generally avoided when transcribing within texts 
written in classical Chinese, because of its semantic value: 譬 ‘for example.’ 

 

嬪 


OJ: pi OC: *bin 

LH: bin EMC: bjien LMC: pɦjin GO: bin KN: fin 

NOM: NA SV: tần SK: pin 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This phonogram appears in Man’yōshū, 
but only once. 

MYS 873 

余呂豆余尓 yoroduyo ni Let us pass down this tradition 

可多利都夏等之 katarituge to si to the myriad generations— 

許能多氣仁 kono take ni it seems she waved 

比例布利家良之 pire purikyerasi her scarf on this peak, 

麻通羅佐用嬪面 matura saywopimye Princess Sayo of Matsura. 

 

日 


OJ: pi OC: *nit 

LH: ńit EMC: ɲit GO: niti KN: zitu 

NOM: nhật SV: nhật, nhựt SK: il 

Usage / History: 

This kungana was very popular in Japan, used because pi means ‘sun, day.’ 
In the Taihō census of 702 we already find names like 事日 KOTOPI. The 
toponym pimuka (later Hyūga) is consistently written 日向 in Kojiki, Kujiki, 
Nihon shoki, and Shoku Nihongi. A rather obscure deity such as Nigi Hayahi, nigi 
payapi, has his name written with 日 in Kojiki (邇芸速日命), Shoki (饒速日命), 
Kujiki (饒速日尊), and Shinsen shōjiroku (神饒速日命). 

Man’yōshū engages in some experimentation with the logographic nature of 
this graph, though it is limited because of the semantics: 日知之御世従 PIZIRI 
NO MIYO YU ‘from the reign of the sagacious ruler’ (MYS 29), where 日知 ‘sun- 


know’ is a logographic transcription for piziri ‘sage.’ 足日木乃 山之四付二 
ASIPIKWI no / YAMA NO siDUZU ni ‘where water drops from the mountain which 
cramps the legs…’ (MYS 107). Here it simply represents pi of pikwi ‘to cramp up.’ 
佐日之隈廻乎 saPI NO KUMAMWI wo ‘that road of Hinokuma” (MYS 175). This 
usage is interesting because Hinokuma is generally written 檜隈, but here a 
different usage is invoked, perhaps to give attention to the idea of light or sun. 

 

檜 


OJ: pi OC: *kôt or *kôts 

LH: kuɑs or kuat EMC: kwâih or kwât GO: kuwe KN: kuwai 

NOM: củi, cội SV: quái, cối SK: hwoy 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind pi (no kwi) ‘cypress tree.’ This usage is found 
twice in Kojiki in in the toponym 檜坰 PINOKUMA. 

This kungana appears in Nihon shoki 17 times, in names such as 檜隈 
PINOKUMA ‘Hinokuma’ (NSG), and 檜笠岡 PIKASA Hill (NSG). 

 

氷 


OJ: pi OC: *prəŋ 

LH: pɨŋ EMC: pjəŋ GO: fiyou KN: fiyou 

NOM: băng, bông SV: băng SK: ping 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ pi ‘ice.’ Usages include 氷上郡 
PIKAMI [NO] KOPORI ‘District of Hikami,’ and 氷田 PITA. Kojiki includes an 
interesting passage using this graph: 於高天原氷椽多迦斯理 TAKAMA GA PARA 
NI PIGWI takasiri ‘and raise the sun-rafters to the high plain of heaven’ (KG). 

This usage also appears in Nihon shoki 14 times, mainly in 氷上 PIKAMI or 
氷連 PI [NO] MURAZI. This kungana also appears in Man’yōshū 11 times in the 
following types of examples: 足氷木乃 山邊乎指而 ASIPIKWI no / YAMAbye 
wo SASITE ‘headed toward the vicinity of the mountains that cramp one’s legs’ 
(MYS 460); 悪氷木乃 山下動 ASIPIKWI no / YAMASITA TOYOMI ‘causing 
the base of the mountains, where one’s legs get cramped, to stir’ (MYS 2704), 
and 丹穂氷 NIPOPI ‘be stained’ (MYS 3801, 3802). 

 

富 


OJ: po OC: *pəkh *pək-s§ 

LH: puh EMC: pjəuh GO: fu KN: fuu 

NOM: phú SV: phú SK: pwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It has long been a point of contention 
that the Sino-Xenic data, as well as various reconstructed Chinese data show that 
the vowel of this graph was back and rounded. If true, then how could this 
phonogram be used to transcribe a syllable with a mid, unrounded nucleus? Or to 
put it bluntly: how can some scholars claim there was a distinction between a 
type one and a type two po? This discussion becomes all the more difficult, 
because of the labial nature of the initial consonant. 

First, the late Russian linguist, Segei Starostin (2005), reconstructs 富 as 
Late Old Chinese *pə. Schuessler’s latest work reconstructs this as *pəkh, and 
Baxter and Sagart reconstruct this as *pək-s. To this let us add data from Old 
Sino-Vietnamese. While Nom has phú for 富, notice that 婦 ‘wife, woman’ 


which is nearly homophonous with 富, is vợ in Nom. Thus, the reading phú is 
based on LMC, while vợ is based on OC (Miyake pc.). This provides additional 
evidence that the earlier reading was *pə. 

The earliest datable example of this phonogram appears on the Kwangkaytho 
stele inscription: 叵富山 Mount Papo. The earliest example in Japan appears in 
the Inariyama tumulus sword inscription (sixth century): 意富比垝 *opopikwa-
i ‘Great Prince (?).’ This phonogram also appears on a number of mokkan: 
尾張国知多郡富具郷 WOPARI Province Tita District Pogu Village (MK 3080). 

There are numerous instances of this graph in Kojiki, mainly to write the 
prefix 意富 opo ‘large, great.’ An example from a song appears below: 

KK 13 

加牟加是能 kamukaze no On the large boulder 

伊勢能宇美能 ise no umi no by the sea of Ise 

意斐志爾 opwisi ni swept by violent winds— 

波比母登富呂布 papimotoporopu the sea snail crawls about. 

志多陀美能 sitadami no Like the periwinkle 

伊波比母登富理 ipapimotoporopu we will encircle them, 

宇知弖志夜麻牟 utitesi yamamu utterly destroying them. 

This phonogram is used only in rare instances in Nihon shoki. There is one 
example of this in the annotational notes: 背評地名。亦名能備己富里 ‘The 
district name is read nobwi kopori’ (NSG). Other than that, this graph only 
appears eight other times: 層富縣 Sopo District, 意富加羅國王 King of 
Opokara, 新羅王宇流助富利智干 The Silla King, Urudzapori Tikan, 富羅母 
智 a Silla envoy called Poramoti, 加羅己富利知伽 a toponym in Kara called 
Kopori Tika, 富加抃 a man from Koryo called Pokaben, 富干 another man 
from Koryo called Pokan, and 富杼 a Japanese courtier named Podo. It is 
interesting to note that of these eight examples, six are usages from the peninsula. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, found nine times in the 
anthology, mainly confined to Book 20. 

MYS 4368 

久自我波々 kuzigapa pa Kuji River— 

佐氣久阿利麻弖 sakeku ari mate wait for me, safe, unchanged. 

志富夫祢尓 sipobune ni I am coming home 

麻可知之自奴伎 makadisizi nuki in a tide boat with 

和波可敝里許牟 wa pa kapyerikomu a true rudder thrust out. 

 

費 


OJ: po OC: *phəts 

LH: phus EMC: phjweih GO: fi KN: fi 

NOM: bí, phí, phía SV: phí, phị, phi SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. The oldest know example appears on 
the Suda Hachiman mirror inscription (ca. 503), where we find 費直, but I read 
this as atapi, according to the same usage found in Nihon shoki. This old usage 
for po is preserved in the Paekche orthographic pool. One example appears in the 
23rd year of Great King Keitai, where a toponym, poti, is recorded as 費智. 

This phonogram falls out of usage, other than that found in a somewhat 
cryptic use in a song in Nihon shoki: 


NSK 8 

伽牟伽筮能 kamukaze no On the large boulder 

伊齊能于瀰能 ise no umi no by the sea of Ise, 

於費異之珥夜 opoisi niya swept by violent winds— 

異波臂茂等倍屢 ipapimotoporu the sea snails crawl about: 

之多儾瀰能 sitadami no the perwinkle. 

 

番 


OJ: po OC: *phan 

LH: phuɑn EMC: phjwɐn GO: fon KN: fan 

NOM: phen, phiên SV: phiên SK: pan, pen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, and appears in Kojiki. This phonogram 
is used extremely sparingly, mainly in the name of the grandson of the Sun 
Goddess, 番能邇邇藝命 Po no Ninigi [NO] MIKOTO (KG). This same name is 
transcribed with kungana in Shoki, so that Ninigi’s name includes the 
semantogram 火 ‘fire’ po in it. The word poto ‘vulva’ is written 富登 (or as 
美富登 mipoto, but in the story surrounding the comical dance by Uzumye, we 
find ‘vulva’ written 番登). In the Ōjin section of Kojiki, the Great King requests 
that Paekche send wise and learned men to court. Here we have the name of a 
man experienced in brewing named 仁番, read Nipo. Ōno (1962:912) comments 
on this name, “Because this is the orthography of a foreign individual’s name we 
cannot recognize 番 along with 仁 as kana.” But it is difficult to deny that both 
仁 ni and 番 po are not used in the Japanese orthographic syllabary. 

 

蕃 


OJ: po OC: *pan 

LH: puɑn EMC: pjwɐn GO: fon KN: fan 

NOM: phen,phồn SV: phiên, phiền, phồn SK: pen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to EJS, but appears to simply be a variation of 番, 
which see above. This phonogram is found once in Kojiki when Izanami gives 
birth to the fire deity, and dies from trauma when burned: 美蕃登 mipoto 
‘august vulva.’ 

 

方 


OJ: po OC: *paŋ 

LH: puaŋ EMC: pjwaŋ GO: fau KN: fau 

NOM: phương, vuông SV: phương SK: pang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 866 

波漏々々尓 parwoparwo ni How far off it is, 

於忘方由流可母 omopoyuru kamo one must think. 

志良久毛能 sirakumwo no Separated by a thousand folds 

知弊仁邊多天留 tipye ni pyedateru of white clouds 

都久紫能君仁波 tukusi no kuni pa is the land of Tsukushi. 

 


朋 


OJ: po OC: *bə̂ ŋ 

LH: bəŋ EMC: bəŋ LMC: pɦuəŋ GO: bou KN: fou 

NOM: bằng SV: bằng SK: pung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears 20 times in the poetry of 
Nihon shoki: 

NSK 53 

菟藝泥赴 tuginepu Taking my journey 

揶莽之呂餓波烏 yamasiro gapa wo up the Yamashiro River 

箇破能朋利 kapa nopori where trees grow thickly, 

涴餓能朋例麼 wa ga noporeba I journeyed up the river 

箇波區莽珥 kapakuma ni and came to a bend. 

多知瑳介喩屢 tatisakayuru There stood a flourishing tree 

毛々多羅儒 mwomwo tarazu with many branches. 

揶素麼能紀破 yaswoba no kwi pa How this tree reminded me 

於朋耆瀰呂介茂 opokimiro kamo of you, my Divine Ruler. 

This phonogram appears twice in Man’yōshū, in the same difficult-tointerpret 
poem: 

MYS 3300 

忍照 OSITERU Placing a pull rope 

難波乃埼尓 nanipa no SAKI ni on the bright red-stained ship, 

引登 PIKINOBORU on that red-stained ship, 

赤曽朋舟 AKE NO sopoPUNE I pull it up the river 

曽朋舟尓 sopoPUNE ni at Naniwa Cape, 

綱取繋 TUNA TORIKAKE shining brilliantly, 

引豆良比 PIKOdurapi I pull forcibly, 

有雙雖為 ARINAMI SUREDO but while I almost have it, 

曰豆良賓 IPIdurapi I call out forcibly, 

有雙雖為 ARINAMI SUREDO but while I almost have it, 

有雙不得叙 ARINAMI EZU zo I cannot get it— 

所言西我身 IPARE NI SI A GA MWI there is now a rumor about me. 

 

倍 


OJ: po OC: *bə̂ ʔ 

LH: bəʔ EMC: bwậiʔ LMC: pɦuaj GO: bai KN: fai 

NOM: bội, vội SV: bội SK: poy, phay 

Usage / History: 

The phonogram belongs to the CBS. This is a somewhat puzzling 
development, because this phonogram is also used in Nihon shoki to transcribe pe. 
Miyake (2003a:231) explains that he reconstructs OJ e as “a mid central 
unrounded vowel followed by a palatal glide: *əy.” It seems plausible that some 
of the Nihon shoki scribes parsed 倍 into its parts: pə-y, which is supported by 
Miyake’s thesis that e is actually a diphthong (2003a:262). Usage of this 
phonogram to transcribe po is quite rare, and appears in only two annotational 
notes, and five poems in Shoki: 嚴矛、此云伊箇之倍虚 “ ‘sacred halberd’ is 
read ikasi poko” (NSG). 


NSK 8 

伽牟伽筮能 kamukaze no On the large boulder 

伊齊能于瀰能 ise no umi no by the sea of Ise, 

於費異之珥夜 opoisi niya swept by violent winds— 

異波臂茂等倍屢 ipapimotoporu the sea snails crawl about: 

之多儾瀰能 sitadami no the perwinkle. 

之多儾瀰能 sitadami no And like those sea snails, 

阿誤豫 agwo yo you, my troops! 

阿誤豫 agwo yo You, my sons! 

之多太瀰能 sitadami no Like the periwinkle, 

異波比茂等倍離 ipapimotopori we will encircle them, 

于智弖之夜莽務 utitesiyamamu utterly destroying them! 

于智弖之夜莽務 utitesiyamamu Destroying the enemy! 

 

陪 


OJ: po OC: *bə̂ 

LH: bə EMC: bwậi LMC: pɦuaj GO: bai KN: fai 

NOM: bồi SV: bồi SK: poy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears once in Nihon shoki, and 
while it is difficult to explain its usage from the vantage point of LMC, it appears 
to be nothing more than a graphic variant of 倍 po. 

NSK 32 

等豫保枳 toyo poki It is he who brewed this wine, 

保枳茂苔陪之 pokimotoposi with an eternal blessing, 

訶武保枳 kamupoki dancing he blessed this wine 

保枳玖流保之 pokikuruposi with divine, auspicious words. 

摩菟利虚辭彌企層 maturi kosi miki so This wine was presented by him. 

阿佐孺塢齋 asazu wose Drink every drop. 

佐佐 sa sa Drink! Drink! 

 

裒 


OJ: po OC: *bû 

LH: po EMC: bəu LMC: pɦəw GO: bou KN: fou 

NOM: bâu, bầu, biệu SV: biều SK: phwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears 21 times in the poetry in 
Nihon shoki: 

NSK 75 

野麼等能 yamato no On the peaks 

嗚武羅能陀該儞 womura no take ni of the mountains of Yamato, 

之々符須登 sisi pusu to who shall venture forth 

拕例柯 tare ka to stand before 

擧能居登 kono koto the great one and tell him 

飫裒磨陛儞麻嗚須 opomapye ni mawosu where the beast lays waiting? 

飫裒枳瀰簸 opokimi pa The great lord 

賊據嗚枳舸斯題 soko wo kikasite overhears these words, 

柁磨々枳能 tamamaki no takes his jeweled 

阿娯羅儞陀々伺 agura ni tatasi dais and sits upon it. 


施都魔枳能 situmaki no He takes the dais 

阿娯羅儞陀々伺 agura ni tatasi of cloth and sits upon it. 

斯々磨都登 sisi matu to Waiting for the beast. 

倭我伊麻西麼 wa ga imaseba As I sit here 

佐謂麻都登 sawi matu to waiting for the boar, 

倭我陀々西麼 wa ga tataseba as I rise to my feet, 

陀倶符羅爾 takubura ni a horsefly lands 

阿武柯枳都枳 amu kakituki on my arm and bites me. 

曾能阿武嗚 sono amu wo a dragonfly appears 

婀枳豆波野倶譬 akidu paya kupi and devours the horsefly. 

波賦武志謀 papu musi mo Even the crawling insects 

飫裒枳瀰儞麼都羅符 opokimi ni maturapu continue to serve their lord. 

儺我柯陀播 na ga kata pa I shall leave a tribute 

於柯武 okamu for you, 

婀岐豆斯麻野麻登 akitusima yamato Akizushima Yamato. 

 

袍 


OJ: po OC: *bhu 

LH: bou EMC: baw LMC: pɦuaw GO: bou KN: fou 

NOM: bào SV: bào SK: phwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears once in Nihon shoki in an 
annotational note: 秀眞國、此云袍圖莽句儞 “ ‘Luxuriant-true land’ is read 
potuma kuni’ (NSG). 

 

火 


OJ: po OC: hmə̂ iʔ 

LH: huɑiʔ EMC: xuâ GO: kuwa KN: kuwa 

NOM: hoả SV: hoả SK: hwa 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ po ‘fire,’ the bound form of pwi ‘fire.’ 
In Kojiki there are examples such as 天火明命 AME [NO] POAKARI [NO] 
MIKOTO (KG), and the brothers of Jinmu, who all were born from a fire and thus 
have this as part of their name: 火照命 PODERI [NO] MIKOTO, 火須勢理命 
POsuseri [NO] MIKOTO, and 火遠理命 POwori [NO] MIKOTO (KG). In Nihon 
shoki these same usages are also found for Jinmu’s brothers: 火明命 PO [NO] 
AKARI [NO] MIKOTO, 火闌降命 PONOSUSORI [NO] MIKOTO, 火進命 PO 
[NO] SUSUMI [NO] MIKOTO, 火折尊 PO [NO] WORI [NO] MIKOTO, and 彦火 
火出見尊 PIKWO POPODEMI [NO] MIKOTO (NSG). 

 

焰 


OJ: po OC: *s-lam or *s-ləm 

LH: ziam, zim EMC: zjäm, zjəm GO: emu KN: emu 

NOM: dim SV: diễm,riệm SK: yem 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram has a number of forms: 焰, 燄, 爓, and means ‘flames.’ 
Similar to 火 po ‘fire’ mentioned above, this kungana calls to mind OJ po ‘fire,’ 
which is a shortened form of ponopo ‘flames.’ One example in the record of 
Senka in Nihon shoki contains the name 火焔皇子 Prince PO [NO] PO (NSG). 

 


帆 


OJ: po OC: *bam 

LH: buam EMC: bjwɐm GO: bomu KN: famu 

NOM: buồm SV: phàm SK: pem 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ po ‘sail.’ There is a single example in 
Nihon shoki: 手置帆負神 the deity TAOKIPO OPI (NSG). Another example 
appears in Man’yōshū in the following poem. 

MYS 935 

名寸隅乃 NAKI SUMI no Out in the Bay of Matsuho 

船瀬従所見 PUNASE YU MIYURU by Awaji Island which 

淡路嶋 APADIZIMA is visible from the ferry 

松帆乃浦尓 MATUPO no URA ni at the corner of Naki 

朝名藝尓 ASANAgi ni I have heard 

玉藻苅管 TAMAMO KARITUTU that there are female divers 

暮菜寸二 YUPU NAGI ni who cut gem weed 

藻塩焼乍 MOSIPO YAKITUTU in the morning waves, 

海末通女 AMA WOTOMYE and burn seaweed for salt 

有跡者雖聞 ARI TO PA KIKYEDO in the evening waves. 

 

品 


OJ: pomu OC: *phrəmʔ 

LH: phimʔ EMC: phjəmʔ GO: fomu KN: fimu 

NOM: phẩm SV: phẩm SK: phum 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. This graph appears on several excavated 
wooden tablets: 品遅 国 前 Pomudi KUNIMAPYE (MK 10227), 品治 部 
PomudiBYE (MK 805). 

It appears in the preface to Kojiki, written by Yasumaro. There he writes the 
name o f G reat King Ō jin a s 品陀 pomuda (KG), following the spelling of 
Kojiki: 品陀和気命 Pomuda Wake [NO] MIKOTO (KG). Also, the name of a 
child of Great King Chūai is spelled 品夜和気命 Pomuya Wake [NO] MIKOTO 
(KG). There is also a name of group spelled 伊勢之品遲部君 Ise NO 
PomudiBYE KIMI (KG). 

This phonogram appears in Nihon shoki in names like 吉備品遲部 Kibi 
PomudiBYE (NSG), and 品治 Pomudi (NSG). These same two names appear 
also in Shoku Nihongi. 

 

法 


OJ: popo OC: *pap 

LH: puap EMC: pjwɐp GO: fofu KN: fafu 

NOM: phắp, phép SV: pháp SK: pep 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears to be transcribing OJ popo. 
In Nihon shoki, a daughter of Soga no Umako is recorded as 法提郎媛. The 
interlinear kana is fofote no iratume, or Princess Hohote. A related usage appears 
in the Bungo Census of 702: 法提賣, apparently read Popotemye. In Izumo 
fudoki there is a village name written 法吉, which has a textual traditional 
reading of fofoki. 

 


不 


OJ: pu OC: *pə or *pəʔ 

LH: pu, puʔ EMC: pjəu, pjəuʔ GO: fu KN: fuu 

NOM: bất SV: bất SK: pu, pul 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. In Wei zhi this phonogram transcribes 
two toponyms: 不彌 *pu-me and 不呼 *pu-ho. 

This phonogram appears in Koryŏgi in two place names: 不耐城 Pu-nə 
Fortress and 不而縣 Pu-nɨ Province (Takeuchi 1977:36). This usage also 
appears in the Paekche orthographic pool, once in the record of Keitai, and twice 
in the record of Kinmei. Perhaps the most famous example is that of Kawachi 
Atai 加不至費直 kaputi ATAPI, seen in the second year, seventh month of 
Kinmei. The other example appears in the 10th year of Keitai, fifth month, where 
a Paekche name is recorded: 木刕不麻甲 Mokra Pumakapu. 

This phonogram was generally avoided in Japan, because of its grammatical 
function as a negative, ‘not.’ However, there are a few examples of this graph 
preserved in Japanese records. In the Mino Census of the Taihō Census of 702 
we find the surname 不破 Puha, which likely is an auspicious usage from the 
revolt of Temmu, whose troops had a decisive battle at Puha, thus 不破 ‘was 
not defeated.’ Perhaps the famous example in Nihon shoki is that of 不比等 
Pubito (Fujiwara Fubito). As Ōno points out (1977:814) the choice of Chinese 
characters is deliberately the work of the compilers, as 不比等 means ‘he who 
is without equal.’ There is also the name 不遲 Puti (NSG). There is a mokkan 
excavated from the Heijō Captial: 不破万呂 Puha maro (unnumbered tablet). 

In Man’yōshū there are a number of examples of this graph, but many are not 
phonetic; hwever, they do provide clues to the reading, such as 不知 ‘don’t 
know’ which elicits the word isa ‘I’m not sure.’ I have been able to find 21 
examples of 不 used as a phonogram. 

MYS 844 

伊母我陛邇 imo ga pye ni How the plum blossoms 

由岐可母不流登 yuki kamo puru to swirl about so much 

弥流麻提尓 miru made ni that I think I see 

許々陀母麻我不 kokoda mo magapu that it must be snowing 

烏梅能波奈可毛 ume no pana kamo at the house of my beloved. 

 

夫 


OJ: pu OC: *ba or *pa 

LH: buɑ, puɑ EMC: bju, pju GO: bu KN: fu 

NOM: phu SV: phù SK: pwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, and appears to have been used to 
transcribe pu, though if this graph was used to transcribe pu in OJ texts, there are 
no surviving examples. The most well known example is 夫余 *pu-yɑ as found 
in Wei zhi, on the Kwangkaytho stele, and in other records. It is possible that on 
the peninsula this graph was used to transcribe pu in word-initial position, but bu 
in word-medial position. That might provide a clue to the word 安夫 seen in the 
Kwangkaytho stele, and suggest a reading of abu. It is also possible that 夫 at 
this early stage reflects bu in all positions. This graph also appears in a name 
preserved on on the Hamcwu stele: 服冬知夫 *puk-touŋ-te-puɑ. In Nihon shoki 


there is Paekche delegate known as 夫智奈麻禮 Putinamare. It is not clear 
whether this should be a voiced initial or not, as OJ did not allow voiced initials, 
and this filter may have screened most examples out of our database. See 夫 for 
OJ bu. 

 

服 


OJ: pu OC: *bə or *bək 

LH: buʔ, buk EMC: bjəuʔ, bjuk GO: buku KN: fuku 

NOM: phục SV: phục SK: pok 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. There is an example of this graph 
preserved on the Hamcwu stele: 服冬 知 夫 *puk-touŋ-te-puɑ. Only one 
example has been preserved in Nihon shoki, found in the record of Tenji, second 
year, ninth month, where several Paekche fortresss are listed, among them one 
known as 枕服岐城 Simpuki Fortress. This graph appears once in Kojiki, in the 
name of a mountain: 伊服岐能山 Ipuki no YAMA (KG). 

 

布 


OJ: pu OC: *pâh 

LH: pɑh EMC: puoh GO: fu KN: fo 

NOM: bố SV: bố, bá SK: phwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS, and appears in Nihon shoki’s 
transcription of peninsular toponyms. In one account in the 23rd year of Keitai, 
Silla attacks and destroys three fortresss belonging to Kara: 刀伽・古跛・布那 
牟羅、三城 ‘The three fortresss of Twoka, Kwope, and Punamura.’ In the 24th 
year of Keitai, we find two names of peninsular people with mainland Japanese 
fathers, as their surname is 吉備 Kibwi: 又殺吉備韓子那多利・斯布利 ‘And 
they killed Kibwi Karakwo Natari and Sipuri.’ 

The earliest examples of 布 to appear in Japan are found in Jōgūki: 弟布遲 
波良己等布斯郎女 ‘Princess OTO Pudipara Kotopusi’ and 妹布利比彌命 
‘(his) sister, Puri Pimye [NO] MIKOTO. Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu, which was 
compiled in the late eighth century, but which contains information that predates 
Kojiki and Nihon shoki contains the name of Bidatsu written as 怒那久良布刀多 
麻斯支天皇 ‘Great King Nunakura Putwotamasiki.’ 

This phonogram appears on a number of mokkan: 布志□嶋 PusiX Island 
(unnumbered tablet), 布乃利 punori ‘seaweed glue’ (unnumbered tablet), 阿布 
比二束 ‘two bundles of apupi ‘hollyhock’’ (MK 1756), and a fragment of the 
poem: 奈尓皮ツ尓佐久矢己乃皮奈布由己母利伊真皮々留部止 nanipatu ni / 
saku YA ko no pana / puyugomori iMA pa paruPYE to “At the ferry of Naniwa / 
how these blossoms bloom / awakening from winter / now they say it is almost 
spring…” (MK 1613). There are nine examples of this phonogram in the 
liturgies: 曾布登御名物白弖 sopu to MINA MONO MAWOSIte “(Those deities) 
who have the name of…the deity of the Sopu District…” (NT 1). 

This phonogram also appears in the earliest census of 702. In the Chikuzen 
census we find the name 加布知麻呂 Kaputi Maro. The graph 布 is the 
primary graph in Kojiki to transcribing pu. Examples include 布斗麻迩爾 
putwomani ni ‘by heavy divination (using a deer bone)’ (KG), 建布都神 ‘the 
deity TAKYEputu,’ and 豐布都神 ‘the deity TOYOputu’ (KG). 


KK 34 

那豆岐能 naduki no On the stalks of rice 

多能伊那賀良迩 ta no inagara ni in the field flooded with water, 

伊那賀良爾 nagara ni on those stalks of rice 

波比母登富呂布 papimotoporopu the eternal vine sends up 

登許呂豆良 tokorodura shoots that wind around. 

This phonogram is prominent in the Bussoku stele poems, where 布 appears 
10 times. Below is an illustrative example: 

BSS 15 

久須理師波 kusurisi pa As for physicians 

都祢乃母阿礼等 tune no mo aredo there are the commons ones, 

麻良比止乃 marapito no but the present physican 

伊麻乃久須理師 ima no kusurisi who is a stranger, 

多布止可理家利 taputokarikyeri he is worthy of honor. 

米太志加利鷄利 medasikarikyeri He is worthy of respect. 

This phonogram is also prominent in Man’yōshū, appearing roughly 532 
times: 

MYS 800 

父母乎 TITI PAPA wo You feel admiration 

美礼婆多布斗斯 mireba taputwosi seeing your father and mother. 

妻子見礼婆 MYEKWO MIreba You feel love and affection 

米具斯宇都久志 megusi utukusi seeing your wife and children. 

余能奈迦波 yo no naka pa As for society 

加久叙許等和理 kaku zo kotowari this is only natural. 

母智騰利乃 motidori no Like a bird caught in birdlime 

可可良波志母与 kakarapasi mo yo it is difficult to get out, as we 

由久弊斯良祢婆 yukupye siraneba do not know where to go. 

宇既具都遠 ukegutu wo And like one to takes off 

奴伎都流其等久 nukituru gotoku shoes with holes in them 

布美奴伎提 puminukite people who step on 

由久智布比等波 yuku tipu pito pa and walk away from family 

伊波紀欲利 ipakwi ywori are perhaps ones who 

奈利提志比等迦 nari desi pito ka are born of boulders or trees. 

奈何名能良佐祢 na ga NA norasane Tell me your name! 

 

甫 


OJ: pu OC: *paʔ 

LH: puɑʔ EMC: pjuʔ GO: fu KN: fo 

NOM: phủ SV: phủ SK: pwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, and appears in Chikuzen Census of 702, 
in the names 甫西豆賣 Pusetumye, 与曾甫賣 Yosopumye, and 伊止甫 
Itopu. It also appears in Nihon shoki, once in the annotational notes and five 
times in song: 美飮喫哉、此云于魔羅儞烏野羅甫屢柯倭 “ ‘oh, how to drink’ 
is read umara ni wo yarapurugane’ (NSG). 

NSK 85 

阿佐膩簸囉 asadipara Through the rocky path of 

嗚贈禰嗚須擬 wosone wo sugwi the mountains and over 


謨謀逗頴甫 momodutapu Asaji Plain comes a distant, 

奴底喩羅倶慕與 nute yuraku mo yo continuous jingle of a bell. 

於岐毎倶羅之慕 okime kurasi mo It seems Okime has arrived. 

 

賦 


OJ: pu OC: *pah 

LH: puɑh EMC: pjuh GO: fu KN: fu 

NOM: phú SV: phú SK: phwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Kojiki in names like 伊賦 
夜坂 Ipuya SAKA ‘Ifuya Hill’ (KG) and 賦登麻和訶比賣 Putomawaka Pimye 
‘Princess Futomawaka’ (KG). It even appears in the name of the name of the 
ruler later known as Kōrei: 大倭根子日子賦斗迩命 OPOYAMATO NEKWO 
PIKWO putwoni [NO] MIKOTO (KG). 

This phonogram is also quite popular in Nihon shoki. It appears four times in 
annotational notes such as: 逐之、此云波羅賦 “ ‘Banish’ is read parapu” 
(NSG), 經津、此云賦都 “ ‘經津’ is read putu” (NSG). It is used 11 times in 
song: 

 

NSK 115 

舸娜紀都該 kanakwi tuke The steed that I kept 

阿我柯賦古磨播 aga kapu kwoma pa bridled with hard wood 

比枳涅世儒 pikidesezu was never allowed outside. 

阿我柯賦古磨乎 aga kapu kwoma pa How has someone found 

比騰瀰都羅武箇 pito mituramu ka that steed that I nurtured? 

 

福 


OJ: pu, puki, puku OC: *pək 

LH: puk EMC: pjuk GO: fuku KN: fuku 

NOM: phúc SV: phúc, phước SK: pwok 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It is rather rare, but appears in Tenpyō 
era documents to spell 福當 Putagi. It also appears in the Hitachi Fudoki, 
representing 福慈岳 Puzi [NO] YAMA ‘Mount Fuji.’ It also appears in a fragment 
of the lost Owari fudoki in the name 伊福 Ipuki. Shoku Nihongi preserves 
examples such as 伊志麻呂福地 Isimaro Pukuti (761.3.15), 福良津 port of 
Pukura (772.9.21), and 福那理 Pukunari (772.10.11). 

 

否 


OJ: pu OC: *pəʔ 

LH: puəʔ > puʔ EMC: pjəuʔ GO: fu KN: fuu 

NOM: bĩ SV: phủ SK: pwu, pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1170 

佐左浪乃 sasaNAMI no It is said that when clouds 

連庫山尓 NAMIKURA YAMA ni appear on Mount Namikura 

雲居者 KUMWO WIREBA of Sasanami, 

雨會零智否 AME so PURUtipu there will be rain. 

反来吾背 KAPYERIKO WA GA SE Come home to me, my beloved. 


敷 


OJ: pu OC: *pha 

LH: phuɑ EMC: phju LMC: fuə GO: fu KN: fu 

NOM: phô SV: phu SK: pwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears three times in the song of 
Nihon shoki: 

NSK 40 

阿波旎辭摩 apadisima The isle of Awaji 

異椰敷多那羅弭 iya puta narabi truly lies next to Azuki Island. 

阿豆枳辭摩 adukisima The isle of Azuki 

異椰敷多那羅弭 iya puta narabi truly lies next to Awaji— 

豫呂辭枳辭摩之魔 yoroskiki sima sima such wonderful islands. 

儾伽多佐例阿羅智之 taka tasare aratisi Who is taking my consort? 

吉備那流伊慕塢 kibwi naru imo wo I had just become intimate 

阿比瀰菟流慕能 apimituru mono with that maiden from Kibi. 

This phonogram appears 47 times in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 4079 

美之麻野尓 misimaNWO ni Mist trails over 

可須美多奈妣伎 kasumi tanabiki the plain of Mishima, 

之可須我尓 sikasuga ni but in spite of that 

伎乃敷毛家布毛 kinopu mo kyepu mo snow has fallen 

由伎波敷里都追 yuki pa puritutu both yesterday and today. 

 

府 


OJ: pu OC: *poʔ 

LH: puoʔ EMC: pjuʔ LMC: fuə GO: fu KN: fu 

NOM: phủ SV: phủ SK: pwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears twice in the annotational 
notes and three times in song in Nihon shoki: 柴、此云府璽 “ ‘Obstruct’ is read 
pusi” (NSG). 

NSK 97 

莒母唎矩能 kumoriku no In the hidden land, 

簸覩細能哿波庚 patuse no kapa yu the bamboo flowing down 

那峨礼倶屢 nagarekuru the Hatsuse River— 

駄開能 take no wonderful, flourishing bamboo 

以矩美娜開余嚢開 ikumidake yodake with long joints and leaves. 

謨等陛嗚麼 motopye woba We will make a koto 

莒等儞都倶唎 koto ni tukuri out of the base of it, 

須衞陛嗚麼 suwepye woba and make a flute 

府曳儞都倶唎 puye ni tukuri out of the top of it, 

符企儺須 pukinasu and out music 

美母慮我紆陪儞 mimoro ga upe ni will reach to the top 

能朋梨陀致 nobori tati of Mount Mimoro. 

倭我彌細麼 wa ga miseba When I gaze down 

都奴娑播符 tunwo sapapu on Iware Pond 

以簸例能伊開能 ipare no ike no with rocks covered in vines 

美那矢駄府 minasitapu even the fish 


紆鳴謨 uwo mo come to the surface 

紆陪儞堤堤那皚矩 upe ni dete nageku and lament your parting. 

 

赴 


OJ: pu OC: *phokh 

LH: phuoh EMC: phjuh LMC: fuə GO: fu KN: fu 

NOM: NA SV: phó, thú SK: pwu 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the LJS, and appears in Nihon shoki once in the 
annotational notes, and 14 times in song. 韴靈、此云赴屠能瀰哆磨 “ ‘(the 
sword) Futu no mitama’ is read putu no mitama” (NSG). 

NSK 51 

那珥波譬苔 nanipa pito Men of Naniwa! 

須儒赴泥苔羅齊 suzu pune torase Grab the rope to the bell-boat. 

許辭那豆瀰 kosi nadumi Get up to your waist in 

曾能赴尼苔羅齊 sono pune torase the water and pull that boat! 

於朋瀰赴泥苔禮 opomipune tore Pull the great boat in. 

 

富 


OJ: pu OC: *pəkh 

LH: puh EMC: pjəuh LMC: fuw GO: fu KN: fu 

NOM: phú SV: phú SK: pwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. See 富 OJ po for its earlier usage. 
Even in the Taihō Census of 702 we still find 富 written as po, attesting to its 
earlier use. Ōno (1962:463) mentions 日富郡 NIpu District, as found in the 
Nara era records, but these examples are rare. Harima Fudoki records toponyms 
such as 宗我富 Sugapu and 與富等 Yoputo. There are only two possible 
examples of 富 used to transcribe pu in Nihon shoki: 層富縣 Sopu [NO] 
AGATA (NSG) and 富制臣 Puse [NO] OMI (NSG). It needs to be pointed out, 
however, that most manuscripts of Nihon shoki gloss 層富 as sopo and not sopu. 
This district is later written 添, which should be read sopu. For the time being I 
leave this as is. Shoku Nihongi contains the usage 富士 puzi (781.7.6). 

 

負 


OJ: pu OC: *bəʔ 

LH: buəʔ > buʔ EMC: bjəuʔ LMC: fɦuw GO: bu KN: fu 

NOM: phụ SV: phụ SK: pwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. There are four examples in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 4400 

伊弊於毛負等 ipye omopu to When I think of home 

伊乎祢受乎礼婆 i wo nezuworeba and I find I cannot sleep 

多頭我奈久 tadu ga naku I cannot see the reeds 

安之弊毛美要受 asipye mo miyezu where the cranes call out, 

波流乃可須美尓 paru no kasumi ni because of the spring mists. 

 

符 


OJ: pu OC: *bo 

LH: buo EMC: bju LMC: fɦuə GO: bu KN: fu 

NOM: phù, bùa SV: phù SK: pwu 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears in Nihon shoki, once in the 
annotational notes, and once in song: 壺、此云都符 “ ‘Jar’ is read tupu” (NSG). 

NSK 75 

野麼等能 yamato no On the peaks 

嗚武羅能陀該儞 womura no take ni of the mountains of Yamato, 

之々符須登 sisi pusu to who shall venture forth 

拕例柯 tare ka to stand before 

擧能居登 kono koto the great one and tell him 

飫裒磨陛儞麻嗚須 opomapye ni mawosu where the beast lays waiting? 

飫裒枳瀰簸 opokimi pa The great lord 

賊據嗚枳舸斯題 soko wo kikasite overhears these words, 

柁磨々枳能 tamamaki no takes his jeweled 

阿娯羅儞陀々伺 agura ni tatatsi dais and sits upon it. 

施都魔枳能 situmaki no He takes the dais 

阿娯羅儞陀々伺 agura ni tatasi of cloth and sits upon it. 

斯々磨都登 sisi matu to Waiting for the beast. 

倭我伊麻西麼 wa ga imaseba As I sit here 

佐謂麻都登 sawi matu to waiting for the boar, 

倭我陀々西麼 wa ga tatatseba as I rise to my feet, 

陀倶符羅爾 takubura ni a horsefly lands 

阿武柯枳都枳 amu kakituki on my arm and bites me. 

曾能阿武嗚 sono amu wo a dragonfly appears 

婀枳豆波野倶譬 akidu paya kupi and devours the horsefly. 

波賦武志謀 papu musi mo Even the crawling insects 

飫裒枳瀰儞麼都羅符 opokimi ni maturapu continue to serve their lord. 

儺我柯陀播 na ga kata pa I shall leave a tribute 

於柯武 okamu for you, 

婀岐豆斯麻野麻登 akitusima yamato Akizushima Yamato. 

 

浮 


OJ: pu OC: *bu 

LH: bu EMC: bjəu LMC: fɦuw GO: bu KN: fu 

NOM: phù SV: phù SK: pwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears only in Nihon shoki, six 
times in annotational notes: 吹棄氣噴之狹霧、此云浮枳于都屢伊浮岐能佐擬 
理 “ ‘Expel from the mouth into a mist’ is read pukiuturu ipuki no sagiri” (NSG), 
鯽魚女、此云浮儺謎 “ ‘The name 鯽魚女’ is read punamye” (NSG). 

 

輔 


OJ: pu OC: *baʔ 

LH: buɑʔ EMC: bjuʔ LMC: fɦuə GO: bu KN: fu 

NOM: NA SV: phụ SK: pwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears ten times in a variety of 
songs in Nihon shoki. 


NSK 98 

比攞哿駄喩 pirakata yu Heading up through 

輔曳輔枳能朋樓 puye puki noboru the port of Hirakata 

阿符美能野 apumi no ya someone plays a flute. 

愷那能倭倶吾伊 kena no wakugwo i It is young Kena of Afumi, 

輔曳符枳能朋樓 puye puki noboru playing as as he rows upstream. 

 

経 


OJ: pu OC: *kêŋ or *kêŋh 

LH: keŋ, keŋh EMC: kieŋ, kieŋh GO: kiyau KN: kei 

NOM: kinh SV: kinh SK: kyeng 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ pu ‘pass through, time passes’ in the 
conclusive form. This usage appears in Nihon shoki in names like 経津主 
PUTUNUSI (NSG), 眞経津鏡 MAPUTU KAGAMI ‘Mafutu Mirror’ (NSG), 
and 経湍屯倉 PUSE granary (NSG). 

This graph also appears in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 928 

食國乎 WOSU KUNI wo Because you 

治賜者 WOSAMETAMAPYEBA rule over the land 

奥鳥 OKITU TORI the plain of Ajifu 

味経乃原尓 ADIPU no PARA ni birds in the offing 

物部乃 MONONOPU no the eighty groups 

八十伴雄者 YASO TOMO NO WO PA of the officials 

廬為而 IPORI SITE have made the capital 

都成有 MIYAKWO NASITARI by pitching temporary huts 

旅者安礼十方 TABWI PA aredomo as if they are on a trip... 

It should be mentioned that Ōno (1977:598) has already pointed out that 
there are numerous examples of 経 in Man’yōshū, as in the beginning of MYS 
135 角障経 TUNWO SAPAPU ‘covered in vines’ or MYS 194 流觸経 
NAGARE PURABAPU ‘flow and touch together’ or MYS 264 不知代経浪乃 
ISAYOPU NAMI no ‘waves that hesitate,’ where this kungana represents a verb or 
part a verb. 

 

歴 


OJ: pu OC: *rêk 

LH: lek EMC: liek GO: riyaku KN: reki 

NOM: lịch, lệch, rếch SV: lịch SK: lyek 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ pu ‘time passes,’ as 歴 means ‘to 
pass through in order.’ This usage appears in Nihon shoki only a few times, as in 
the name of the deity that possesses and talks through Jingū: 向匱男聞襲大歴五 
御魂速狹騰尊 MUKAPITU WOmo OSOPU ITU [NO] KAMWI TAMA PAYASA 
NOBORI [NO] MIKOTO (NSG). Also in the first year of Tenmu we see the name of 
a highway, 倉歴道 KURAPU [NO]MITI ‘Kurafu Highway’ (NSG). 

This usage appears eight times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 393 

不所見十方 MIYEZU TOMO Even if it is not visible 

孰不戀有米 TARE KWOPWIZARAme who does not yearn for it? 


山之末尓 YAMA NO PA ni The moon hesitating to appear 

射狭夜歴月乎 ISA YWOPU TUKWI wo over the edge of the mountains; 

外見而思香 YOSO NI MITE siKA To see it even from a distance. 

 

乾 


OJ: pu OC: *kân or *ɡan 

LH: kɑn, ɡɨan EMC: kân, ɡjän GO: kemu KN: gamu 

NOM: càn, gàn SV: can, kiền SK: kan, ken 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ pu ‘dry up.’ This usage appears only 
in Nihon shoki, and then only once: 市乾鹿文、乾、此云賊 ‘(An elder sister 
named) ITIPU KAYA, the graph 乾 is to be read pu’ (NSG). 

 

鳳 


OJ: puge OC: *bəms 

LH: buəmh EMC: bjuŋ LMC: fɦuwŋ GO: buu KN: fou 

NOM: phượng SV: phượng, phụng SK: pwong 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This rare usage appears in Shoku 
Nihongi: 割越前國之羽咋、能登、鳳至、珠洲四郡。始置能登國 “(The 
court) took the four districts of Pakupi, Noto, Pugesi, and Suzu from Echizen 
Province and for the first time established Noto Province” (718.5.2). 

 

粉 


OJ: puni OC: *pənʔ 

LH: punʔ EMC: pjwənʔ GO: fun KN: fun 

NOM: phân, phấn SV: phấn SK: pwun 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 932 

白浪之 SIRANAMI NO Off I go to be covered 

千重来縁流 TIPYE NI KIYOSUru in the yellow earth 

住吉能 SUMIYOSI no of the coast of Sumiyoshi 

岸乃黄土粉 KWISI no PANIpu ni where the white caps 

二寶比天由香名 nipopite yuKANA wash in piled one upon another. 

 

弗 


OJ: puti, putu OC: *pət 

LH: put EMC: pjwət GO: futi KN: futu 

NOM: phất SV: phất SK: pwul 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This usage appears on the Tanyang 
Silla stele (ca. 550), in the name: 奈弗耽郝失利 *Nɑ-put Tam-hak-sit-li. It also 
appears in a toponym that apparently was part of a four-village area belonging 
originally to ancient Kara / Mimana: 弗知鬼 Put-tie-kui. This four-village area 
also appears in the Keitai record, with a variant of the earlier name 費智 Phətstie. 
The record of Bidatsu also has this toponym as 發鬼 Puɑt-kui. 

This phonogram appears in Book 5 of Sendai kuji hongi: 物部伊莒弗 
MONONOBYE Ikoputu. This same name also appears in Nihon shoki. In Nihon 
shoki there is also a prenasalized variant of this phonogram in the name 忌部首 


色弗 IMIBYE OBITO Sikobuti (NSG). Furthermore, a foreign name with this 
phonogram appears in Shoku Nihongi: 烏須弗 Usuputu (773.6.12). 

 

皮 


OJ: pwi OC: bai 

LH: bɨɑi > bɨe EMC: bje GO: bi KN: fi 

NOM: bì, bề, bìa, vừa SV: bì SK: phi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. Interestingly, the only Sino-Xenic data 
that support the Old Japanese reconstruction for pwi (phonetically [pɨy]) is the 
Nom data vừa, which phonetically is [vɨa], which matches nicely with Later Han 
bɨɑi. It is based on this evidence that I place 皮 here. 

Only one example of this phonogram used to transcribe pwi has been 
preserved in Nihon shoki. It appears in the 11th year of Kinmei, recording the 
name of a Paekche man Pwikukon, 皮久斤. It must be noted in passing, however, 
that the later annotation of Shoki, Shaku Nihongi, reads this as pikonkon, but the 
initial segment remains pwi. 

There are few examples of this phonogram, but on one mokkan we find the 
name 亀甘部伊皮□ KAMEKAPIBYE IpwiX (MK 3623). Another fragment 
contains the phonograms 加皮止利 kapwi tori ‘taking the fire (to chase away 
mosquitoes, MK 1642).’ It should be remembered that there are many cases 
where 皮 is a loan for 波 pa, so none of the readings above is completely 
secure. 

 

非 


OJ: pwi OC: pəi 

LH: pui EMC: pjwei GO: fi KN: fi 

NOM: phi SV: phi SK: phi 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the EJS. It appears in the name 乎非王 Prince 
Wopwi as preserved in the Jōgūki fragment. The graph also appears twice in the 
Chikuzen census of 702 CE: 非豆賣 Pwidumye and 志非 Sipwi. 

This graph is also preserved in a song in Hitachi Fudoki: 

許智多鶏波 kotitakyeba As the rumors are painful 
乎婆頭勢夜麻能 wobatuse yama no let us hide ourselves 

伊波歸爾母 ipakwi nimo in the stone enclosure 

爲弖許母郎奈牟 wite komoranamu on Mount Obatsuse. 

奈古非敍和支母 na kwopwi so wagimo Do not yearn for me, my love. 

This phonogram also appears nine times in poetry in Man’yōshū, all used to 
write the verb kwopwi ‘yearn for,’ as the following example illustrates. 

MYS 871 

得保都必等 topotu pito That person far off, 

麻通良佐用比米 matura saywo pimye Princess Sayo of Matsura, 

都麻胡非尓 tuma kwopwi ni yearning for her spouse 

比例布利之用利 pire purisi ywori she waves her scarf— 

於返流夜麻能奈 opyeru yama no na the name this mountain bears. 

 


斐 


OJ: pwi OC: phəiʔ 

LH: phuiʔ EMC: phjweiʔ GO: fi KN: fi 

NOM: phỉ SV: phỉ SK: phi 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the EJS. It appears in once in the Buzen census of 702 
CE, in the name 志斐 Sipwi. It is also used in Kojiki, in transcribing names and 
in song: 甲斐國 kapwi [NO]KUNI ‘the land of Kai’ (KG), and 當摩之咩斐 
Tagima NO Myepwi ‘Mehi of Tagima’ (KG). 

KK 9 

古那美賀 kwonami ga If your first wife 

那許波佐婆 na kopasaba asks for a side dish, 

多知曾婆能 tatisoba no cut her slices of meat 

微能那祁久袁 mwi no nakyeku wo with almost no flesh— 

許紀志斐惠泥 kokwisipwiwene barren like the hawthorn. 

宇波那理賀 upanari ga If your favorite wife 

那許波佐婆 na kopasaba asks for a side dish, 

伊知佐加紀 itisakakwi cut her many slices of meat 

微能意富祁久袁 mwi no opokyeku wo like the hisakaki fruit 

許紀陀斐惠泥 kokwidapwiwene blessed in abundance. 

This phonogram appears in many early records, primarily to record the place 
name 甲斐國 kapwi [NO] KUNI ‘land of Kai.’ This graph also appears in 
Man’yōshū to transcribe the name 志斐 Sipwi and 斐太 Pwida. 

 

肥 


OJ: pwi OC: bəi 

LH: bui EMC: bjwei GO: bi KN: fi 

NOM: phì, phề, phè SV: phì SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It appears in the Chikuzen census of 702 
CE, in the name 肥君 Lord Pwi. In the Buzen census is 肥賣 Pwimye and 阿 
太肥人床持賣 TOKOMOTImye, a person of Adapwi. This graph also appears 
in various records to record the toponym 肥国 ‘land of Pwi.’ Kojiki also uses 
this graph to transcribe names such as 肥河 ‘Pwi River’ (KG), and 肥長比賣 
‘Princess PwiNAGA’ (KG). It is also used, albeit sparingly, in songs in Kojiki: 

KK 24 

佐泥佐斯 sanesasi Standing in the midst of 

佐賀牟能袁怒迩 sagamu no wonwo ni the flames of the burning fire 

毛由流肥能 mwoyuru pwi no on the moor of Sagamu— 

本那迦迩多知弖 pwonaka ni tatite where true peaks are lofty— 

斗比斯岐美波母 twopisi kimi pa mo how my Lord called out for me. 

This phonogram appears three times in Nihon shoki, to represent the land of 
Pwi (肥後). Ōno (1977:595) believes that there is a single usage in Man’yōshū, 
with 肥人 額髪結在 pwi [NO] PITO [NO] / NUKAGAMI YUPERU (MYS 2496), 
but current scholarship sees this 肥人 as actually representing KWOMA PITO ‘a 
person from Koma.’ This Koma is modern Kuma in Fukuoka Prefecture. 

 


飛 


OJ: pwi OC: pəi 

LH: phui EMC: phjwəi GO: fi KN: fi 

NOM: phi SV: phi SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It is primarily found in a one toponym: 
飛騨 Pwida. This appears to be a later representation, as the ‘Kokuzō Hongi’ 
chapter of Kujiki has this toponym as 斐陀 Pwida, but Nihon shoki as 飛騨. 

This phonogram is used sparingly as a phonogram, appearing only five times 
in Man’yōshū, all in Book 5: 

MYS 819 

余能奈可波 yo no naka pa How bothersome are feelings 

古飛斯宜志恵夜 kwopwi sigesi we ya of yearning in the human world. 

加久之阿良婆 kaku si araba If this is how it is to be 

烏梅能波奈尓母 ume no pana nimo it would have been better 

奈良麻之勿能怨 naramasi mono wo if I had been a plum blossom. 

 

悲 


OJ: pwi OC: prəi 

LH: pɨ EMC: pji LMC: pi GO: fi KN: fi 

NOM: bi, bây SV: bi SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears once in Nihon shoki. 

NSK 123 

枳瀰我梅能 kimi ga me no I dock and stand here 

姑裒之枳舸羅儞 kwoposiki kara ni because I long for a glance 

婆底々威底 patete wite of my highness’ eyes. 

舸矩野姑悲武謀 kaku ya kwopwimu mo How I long for a look— 

枳瀰我梅弘報梨 kimi ga me wo pori a look into my highness’ eyes. 

This phonogram also appears in Shoku Nihongi, in the name 大伴古慈悲 
OPOTOMO Kwozipwi. It appears in Man’yōshū 26 times. The following is one 
example: 

MYS 560 

孤悲死牟 kwopwi SINAmu What use is it after 

後者何為牟 NOTI PA NANI SEmu I have died longing for her? 

生日之 IKERU PI NO It is only for the day 

為社妹乎 TAME KOSO IMWO wo that I continue to live 

欲見為礼 MIMAKU PORI SUre that I want to see you. 

It seems clear that this phonogram was selected both for its phonological 
value as well as its semantic meaning when used in kwopwi ‘yearning,’ because 
悲 means ‘sad.’ 

 

彼 


OJ: pwi OC: paiʔ 

LH: pɨɑiʔ EMC: pjeʔ LMC: pi GO: fi KN: fi 

NOM: bỉ, bẽ, bở SV: bỉ SK: phi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only in Nihon shoki, twice 
in the same song in Yūryaku: 


NSK 81 

農播頴磨能 nupatama no If they had saddled that 

柯彼能矩盧古磨 kapwi no kurwo kwoma dark horse from Kahi, 

矩羅枳制播 kuraki seba black as night, 

伊能致志儺磨志 inoti sinamasi he would have lost his life. 

柯彼能倶盧古磨 kapwi no kurwo kwoma Alas, thanks to the dark horse. 

 

祕 


OJ: pwi OC: pits 

LH: pɨs EMC: pjih LMC: pi GO: fi KN: fi 

NOM: bí SV: bí SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only in the annotational 
notes of the beginning of Nihon shoki: 廢渠槽、此云祕波鵝都 “ ‘destroy water 
troughs’ is read pwipagatu” (NSG). 

 

妃 


OJ: pwi OC: phəi 

LH: phui EMC: phjwəI LMC: fji GO: fi KN: fi 

NOM: phi SV: phi SK: pi, poy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to LJS, and appears once in Nihon shoki, in an 
annotational note in Book 1: 秉炬、此云多妃 “ ‘Torch’ is read tapwi” (NSG). 

 

被 


OJ: pwi OC: *phai / *baih 

LH: phɨɑi / bɨɑih EMC: phje~bjeh LMC: pi~pɦi GO: bi KN: pi 

NOM: bị, bự SV: bị SK: phi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, appearing in Nihon shoki, twice in one 
poem in the Jinmu section: 

NSK 7 

固奈瀰餓 kwonami ga If your first wife 

那居波佐麼 na kopasaba asks for a side dish, 

多智曾麼能 tatisoba no cut her slices of meat 

未廼那鷄句塢 mwi no nakyeku wo with almost no meat— 

居氣辭被惠禰 kokwisipwiwene barren, like the hawthorn. 

宇破奈利餓 upanari ga If your favorite wife 

那居波佐麼 na kopasaba asks for a side dish, 

伊智佐介幾 itisakakwi cut her many slices of meat 

未廼於朋鷄句塢 mwi no opokyeku wo like the hisakaki fruit— 

居氣儾被惠禰 kokwidapwiwene blessed in abundance. 

 

火 


OJ: pwi OC: hmə̂ iʔ 

LH: huɑiʔ EMC: xuâ GO: kuwa KN: kuwa 

NOM: hoả SV: hoả SK: hwa 

Usage / History: 

This a kungana suggests to the mind OJ pwi ‘fire.’ It can also represent po, 
the bound form of pwi (which see). As this is a logographic usage, it is difficult 
to know if the intended reading is pwi or po. The best way to determine the 


intended reading is to triangulate the kungana with the same name preserved 
phonetically somewhere else. For example, in Nihon shoki we find 火国 ‘land 
of fire,’ but as this is written 肥国 in Kojiki, we know the proper reading is pwi 
[NO] KUNI ‘land of Hi.’ Kojiki also has the name 火君 PWI [NO] KIMI. 
Examples in Nihon shoki include 火葦北 PWI [NO] ASIKITA ‘Ashikita of Hi,’ 
火国別 PWI [NO] KUNI WAKE, and 火中君 PWI [NO] NAKA [NO] KIMI. 

In Man’yōshū context makes it clear that the free form pwi is intended: 

MYS 2809 

今日有者 KYEPU NAREBA Because it is today 

鼻之鼻火之 PANA NO PANAPWIsi the reason I thought that 

眉可由見 MAYWO kayuMI my nose was ticklish 

思之言者 OMOPIsi KOTO PA and my eyebrows itchy 

君西在来 KIMI NI SI ARIKYEI is because of you, my lord. 

 

樋 


OJ: pwi OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: NA GO: tuu KN: tou 

NOM: thông SV: NA SK: NA 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ pwi ‘gutter.’ This usage appears in 
Kojiki in the name 樋速日神 PWI [NO] PAYAPI [NO] KAMWI, the deity 
Hinohayahi (KG). This kungana also appears in Izumo fudoki: 神名樋山 
KAMUNABWI YAMA ‘Mount Kamunabi’ and 樋速日子命 PWIPAYA PIKWO 
[NO] MIKOTO ‘Prince Hihayahi.’ 

 

乾 


OJ: pwi OC: *kân or *ɡan 

LH: kɑn, ɡɨan EMC: kân, ɡjän GO: kemu KN: gamu 

NOM: càn, gàn SV: can, kiền SK: kan, ken 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ pwi, the infinitive form of pu ‘to dry.’ 
There is one example in Man’yōshū, though it is the prenasalized form: bwi. 

MYS 2281 

朝露尓 ASA TUYU ni Like the spiderwort 

咲酢左乾垂 SAKISUsaBWITARU that blooms in splendor 

鴨頭草之 TUKIKUSA NO through the morning dew 

日斜共 PI KUTATUNAPE NI I feel as if my life 

可消所念 KENU BEKU OMOPOYU will fade away as the sun sets. 

 

干 


OJ: pwi OC: *kân 

LH: kɑn EMC: kân GO: kamu KN: kan 

NOM: can SV: can SK: kan 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ pwi, which is the infinitive of the 
verb pu ‘to dry.’ The phonogram mean to hang something out to dry. This usage 
appears twice in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3848 

荒城田乃 ARAKWIDA no Placing the rice in the storehouse 

子師田乃稲乎 sisiDA no INE wo from the newly opened paddies 


倉尓擧蔵而 KURA ni AGETE where wild game frequents— 

阿奈干稲干稲志 ana PWINEPWINEsi how it has become dry and old, 

吾戀良久者 A GA KWOPUraku PA as my yearning for you. 

 

簸 


OJ: pwi OC: *pâih or *pâiʔ 

LH: pɑih, paiʔ EMC: pwâh, pwâʔ GO: fa KN: fa 

NOM: NA SV: bả, phả SK: pha 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ pwi ‘winnow,’ as 簸 is a device to winnow 
grain. Pwi is the nominalized from of pu ‘to winnow.’ It is a testimony to the fact 
that a large number of sources went into the compilation of Nihon shoki in that it 
is the only record where this graph appears, along with 簸 used as a phonogram 
to transcribe OJ pa. 

In Nihon shoki, when Susanoo descends from heaven, he travels 簸之川上 
PWI NO KAPAKAMI ‘upstream of the Hi River’ (NSG), whereas Kojiki writes the 
name of the river phonetically: 肥上河上 where pwi is the name of the river, and 
it is also marked as having a high accent (上). Interestingly, in modern Kyōto the 
word hiru ‘to winnow’ is tonic, or initial syllable high pitch. 

 

熯 


OJ: pwi OC: *hânʔ 

LH: hɑnʔ EMC: xânʔ GO: kan KN: kan 

NOM: NA SV: hãn SK: han 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ pwi ‘fire,’ which is a slight 
extrapolation from the graph 熯 ‘to burn.’ It is interesting that Nihon shoki is the 
only record to use this graph, and this is always used to represent pwi, while 火 
‘fire’ is always used to represent pwi or po. Consider the following examples, 
juxtaposed with the same name in Kojiki: 熯速日神 PWI [NO] PAYAPI [NO] 
KAMWI versus 樋速日神 PWI [NO] PAYAPI [NO] KAMWI. 

 

菩 


OJ: pwo OC: NA 

LH: bo EMC: bəu GO: bo KN: fo 

NOM: bồ SV: bồ SK: pwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on one Paekche stele: 須菩 
提 *su-bo-te, referring to Deva Subhūti in Buddhist theology. This name appears 
in an inscription on a metal tablet that is dated prior to the downfall of Paekche in 
660. 

The character 菩 appears once in Nihon shoki, in a Paekche name, 菩提 
Pwote. This graph also appears a small number of times in Kojiki, mainly in the 
name 天之菩卑能命 AME NO Pwopi no MIKOTO (KG), and once in a song: 

KK 39 

許能美岐波 kono miki pa This divine wine 

和賀美岐那良受 wa ga miki narazu is not my wine. 

久志能加美 kusi no kami The wondrous director 

登許余迩伊麻須 tokoyo ni imasu who dwells in the Eternal Land, 

伊波多多須 ipatatasu strong like the rocks, 


須久那美迦微能 sukuna mikamwi no the deity Sukuna— 

加牟菩岐 kamu pwoki It is he who 

本岐玖琉本斯 pwokikurupwosi brewed this wine, dancing about 

登余本岐 toyo pwoki brewing this wine 

本岐母登本斯 pwokimotopwosi with divine, auspicious words. 

麻都理許斯美岐敍 maturikosi miki zo This wine was presented by him. 

阿佐受袁勢 asazu wose Drink every drop. 

佐佐 sa sa Drink! Drink! 

 

本 


OJ: pwo OC: *pə̂ nʔ 

LH: pənʔ EMC: pwənʔ GO: fomu KN: fon 

NOM: bản, bổn, vốn SV: bản, bổn SK: pwon 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. On the Kwangkaytho stele we find the 
following toponym: 忽本 *hut-pənʔ. This character also appears in Nihon shoki, 
in quotes from Paekche sources. One appears in the record of Jingū, recording 
the name of the king of Kara, 己本旱岐 Kopwo Kanki. 

This phonogram is the chief graph to transcribe OJ pwo in Kojiki, as the 
following examples demonstrate: 余曾多本毘賣命 Yoso Tapwobimye [NO] 
MIKOTO (KG), 沙本毘古王 Prince Sapwobikwo (KG), and 袁邪本王 Prince 
Wozapwo (KG). In poetry we find the following example: 

KK 30 

夜麻登波 yamato pa Yamato is 

久爾能麻本呂婆 kuni no mapworoba the most prosperous— 

多多那豆久 tatanaduku a land ringed by 

阿袁加岐 awokaki mountains arrayed 

夜麻碁母禮流 yamagomoreru as a green, rolling fence. 

夜麻登志宇流波斯 yamato si urupasi Yes, Yamato is beautiful. 

 

布 


OJ: pwo OC: *pâh 

LH: pɑh EMC: puoh GO: fu KN: fo 

NOM: bố SV: bố, bá SK: phwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, apparently before vowel raising change 
changed this from pwo to pu. There are precious few examples of this pre-raised 
representation. One example is in the eighth year of Keitai, where the place name 
匝布屯倉 ‘Sapwo Storehouse’ is found (NSG). Sapwo is represented as 佐保 
in other records. 

 

保 


OJ: pwo OC: *pûʔ 

LH: pouʔ EMC: pâuʔ GO: fo, fou KN: fou 

NOM: bảo, bầu SV: bảo SK: pwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and the earliest example appears in 
Book 1 of Man’yōshū: 


MYS 21 

紫草能 MURASAKI no Like the purple grass 

尓保敝類妹乎 nipopyeru IMWO wo if I were to think evil of 

尓苦久有者 nikuku ARABA my blushing beloved, 

人嬬故尓 PITODUMA YUWE ni would I also yearn for 

吾戀目八方 ARE KWOPWIME YAMO another’s spouse like this? 

This phonogram is found in the liturgies three times: 古語云許止保企 “In 
the ancient vernacular, ‘pray’ is kotopwoki” (NT 8). It also appears frequently on 
mokkan: 須々保利 susupori ‘greens to be pickled’ (MK 3261), 奈保□ Napo 
X (District?) (MK 877). 

This phonogram is also used quite frequently in Nihon shoki: 神庫此云保玖 
羅 “ ‘divine storage’ is read pwokura” (NSG). 

NSK 32 

虚能彌企破 kono miki pa This divine wine is not 

和餓彌企那羅儒 wa ga miki narazu divine wine of my brewing. 

區之能伽彌 kusi no kami The wondrous director 

等虚豫珥伊麻輸 tokoyo ni imasu who dwells in the Eternal Land, 

伊破多々須 ipatatasu strong like the eternal rocks, 

周玖那彌伽未能 sukuna mikamwi no the deity Sukuna— 

等豫保枳 toyo pwoki It is he who brewed this wine, 

保枳茂苔陪之 pwokimotoposi with an eternal blessing, 

訶武保枳 kamupwoki dancing he blessed this wine 

保枳玖流保之 pwokikuruposi with divine, auspicious words. 

摩菟利虚辭彌企層 maturi kosi miki so This wine was presented by him. 

阿佐孺塢齋 asazu wose Drink every drop. 

佐佐 sa sa Drink! Drink! 

This phonogram is also the main graph used to transcribe po in the Footprints 
of the Buddha poetic sequence: 乃知乃保止気尓 noti no potoke ni ‘the Buddha 
of the future’ (BSS 9). 

The phonogram 保, in its cursive form, is later standardized to hiragana ほ, 
and minus its radical and a few strokes, it results in katakana ホ. 

 

寶 


OJ: pwo > po OC: *pûʔ 

LH: pouʔ EMC: pâuʔ GO: fou KN: fo 

NOM: bảo SV: báo SK: pwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. One of the earliest datable usages with 
this graph occurs in Shoku Nihongi, dated the 10th month of the fifth year of 
Yōrō (721), where the name 藏寳山 Sapo YAMA appears. Shoku Nihongi also 
preserves the usage 寳頭 Podu, a personal name (774.2.23). 

This phonogram appears 13 times in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 725 

二寶鳥乃 nipoDORI no Pond water where 

潜池水 KADUKU IKEMIDU the grebe dives— 

情有者 KOKORO ARABA if you have a heart 

君尓吾戀 KIMI ni A GA KWOPURU then clearly show him my heart 

情示左祢 KOKORO SIMYEsane which yearns for my lord. 


譜 


OJ: pwo > po OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: puo LMC: puə GO: fu KN: fo 

NOM: phả, phổ SV: phổ SK: pwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in Nihon shoki only twice in 
song: 

NSK 100 

柯羅倶爾能 kara kuni no Standing upon the walls 

基能陪儞陁致底 kwi no pe ni tatite of the Kara fortress 

於譜磨故幡 opobakwo pa Ōbako is waving 

比例甫囉須母 pire purasu mo her white scarf— 

耶魔等陸武岐底 yamatopye mukite waving it toward Yamato. 

 

報 


OJ: pwo OC: *pûh 

LH: pouh EMC: pâuh LMC: puaw GO: fou KN: fou 

NOM: báo SV: báo SK: pwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and only appears in Nihon shoki, and 
then there are only two examples in song: 

NSK 45 

瀰箇始報 mikasipwo Filled with reverence, 

破利摩波揶摩智 parima payamati Hayamachi of Harima 

以播區娜輸 ipakudasu will brave danger 

伽之古倶等望 kasikwoku tomo and take care of the maiden 

阿例揶始儺破務 are yasinapamu of the turbulent waters. 

 

褒 


OJ: pwo OC: *pû 

LH: pou EMC: pâu LMC: puaw GO: fou KN: fou 

NOM: bao SV: bao SK: phwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and occurs only in Nihon shoki, once in 
poetry, and seven times in the annotational notes: 曼椒、此云褒曾紀 “ ‘prickly 
ash’ is read pwosokwi” (NSG). 

NSK 41 

訶羅怒烏 karanwo wo The ship Karano 

之褒珥椰枳 sipwo ni yaki was burned to make salt. 

之餓阿摩離 si ga amari The leftover wood 

虚等珥菟句離 koto ni tukuri was used to make a lute. 

 

防 


OJ: pwo OC: *baŋ 

LH: buɑŋ EMC: bjwaŋ LMC: fɦaŋ GO: bau KN: fau 

NOM: NA SV: phòng SK: pang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in the place name 周防 
supwo, which appears in Kujiki, Man’yōshū, and Chikugo fudoki. As is clear 
from this usage and that in Kojiki and Nihon shoki (周芳) this must have 
represented supwo, which later contracts to Suō (*supau > supwo > suwo > suō). 


The tradition of reading this as suwa is a later misconception, influenced by the 
older Sino-Japanese reading of 防・芳 as bau. 

 

抱 


OJ: pwo OC: *bûʔ 

LH: bouʔ EMC: bâuʔ LMC: pɦuaw GO: bou KN: fou 

NOM: bão SV: bão SK: pwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to CBS. It appears 13 times in Man’yōshū, all in 
Book 14. 

MYS 3450 

乎久佐乎等 wokusawo to When I examine the two men, 

乎具佐受家乎等 wogusazukyewo to Okusawo and Ogusa Zukewo, 

斯抱布祢乃 sipwopune no lining them up like 

那良敝弖美礼婆 narabyete mireba boats out in the tide, 

乎具佐可知馬利 wogusa katimyeri it looks like Ogusa wins. 

Regardless that this poem is quite late, appearing in Book 14, which dates to 
the mid-Nara era, and in spite of this poem being an ‘eastern song,’ it is 
encouraging that the graph to write sipwo ‘tide’ uses a graph with a rounded 
nucleus. This does not mean that the poet’s dialect still made a distinction 
between pwo and po, but I would argue that the poet had been taught the older 
tradition from the capital. 

 

袍 


OJ: pwo OC: *bû 

LH: bou EMC: bâu LMC: pɦuaw GO: bou KN: fou 

NOM: bào SV: bào SK: pwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to CBS, and appears once in the annotational notes 
of Nihon shoki: 秀眞國、此云袍圖莽句儞 “ ‘superior country’ is read 
pwotuma kuni” (NSG). 

 

穗 


OJ: pwo > po OC: *s-wis 

LH: zuis EMC: zwih GO: zui KN: sui 

NOM: NA SV: huệ, tuệ SK: pwo 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, suggesting to the reader OJ po ‘rice ear,’ believed to have 
been *pwo. The earliest known usage appears in the Mino Census of 702: 穂積 
PWODUMI, 志穂 SiPWO, and 加穂賣 KaPWOmye. 

Because Japanese was anciently euphemistically known as the land of 
‘precious rice ears’ (瑞穂), and a plentiful harvest of rice in the fall was a sign of 
prosperity, this graph appears in many names. In Kojiki this graph is used when 
the island of Awaji is born, giving it the name 穗之狹別嶋 PWO NO 
SAWAKE [NO] SIMA (KG). The son of the Sun Goddess is named 正勝吾勝勝 
速日天之忍穗耳命 MASA KATU AKATU KATI PAYAPI AME NO OSIPWO MIMI 
[NO] MIKOTO (KG). These same kind of usages also appear in Nihon shoki, 
Kujiki, Man’yōshū, and almost all other Asuka and Nara era texts. 

 


百 


OJ: pwo > po OC: *prâk 

LH: pak EMC: pɐk GO: fiyaku KN: faku 

NOM: bách SV: bá, bách SK: poyk 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, suggesting to the mind the OJ word pwo ‘hundred.’ The 
earliest datable examples come from the Mino Census of 702: 五百木部 
IPWOKWIBYE, 五百利部 IPWOriBYE. From the Yōrō Census (ca. 720) we 
find names such as 五百麻呂 IPWO Maro, 五百瀬麻呂 IPWOSE Maro. All 
examples are based on the OJ interpretation of ‘500’ ipwo. 

 

福 


OJ: pwo, pwoki OC: *pək 

LH: puk EMC: pjuk GO: fuku KN: fuku 

NOM: phúc SV: phúc, phước SK: phwok 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It is found in surviving Sino-Japanese 
with a high back, rounded vowel, but as the SK shows, there was a mid back, 
rounded strain. It may have been that in Japanese this underwent vowel raising: 
pwok- > puk-. 

This appears in the Mino Census of 702 in the name 伊福利 Ipwori. Some 
may wonder why this cannot be Ipwokiri, but Ipwori appears in other parts of the 
same census, written 五百利 or 五百利部 IPWOriBYE. The same census also 
contains the name 伊福部 IpokiBYE. Nihon shoki contains that same name: 伊 
福部 IpwokiBYE (NSG). 

 

凡 


OJ: pwo, pwomu OC: *bam 

LH: buam EMC: bjwɐm GO: bomu KN: famu 

NOM: phàm SV: phàm SK: pwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The earliest example appears in a work 
surrounding Shōtoku Taishi, which records a grandfather of the Great King 
Keitai in the fifth generation who was named 凡牟都和稀王 Prince Pwomuta 
Wake. This is supposedly the same name as Homutu Wake as found in the record 
of Suinin, written 誉津別皇子. The problem is that this usage appears to be 
from the Suiko era or earlier. Recently there has been a revisionist movement to 
claim that texts classified as remnants of the Suiko era are much later works. 
Specifically, Lurie (2001:421) has argued that Jōgūki cannot be taken seriously 
as a work from the Suiko era, but he does allow that the archaic nature of the 
orthography argues for a connection with the seventh century. While I have no 
intention of arguing the origins or dating of a work that only exists as a fragment, 
I will argue that the spelling of this name is very archaic. Notice that if we read 
this name according to the phonology of late Asuka, analogous to that in Kojiki, 
the name would be Pomutu Wakwi. But if we read this name in its Later Han 
Chinese form, then it matches perfectly with Great King Ōjin, whose name was 
Pomuta Wake, as recorded in Kojiki. 

This graph is also found in the name 凡治 Pwomudi. The reading of this 
graph is altered in Man’yōshū, where the Chinese usage of the graph is taken as a 


hint. There is one poem, however, where the reading of pwomu is shortened to 
just po: 

MYS 1333 

佐穂山乎 sapwo YAMA wo I had looked at 

於凡尓見之鹿跡 opo ni MIsi KA TO Mount Saho blankly, 

今見者 IMA MIREBA but now that I look at it 

山夏香思母 YAMA NATUKAsi mo how it tugs at my heart. 

風吹莫勤 KAZE PUKU NA YUME Don’t bother me, wind! 

 

俾 


OJ: pye OC: *peʔ 

LH: pieʔ EMC: pjieʔ GO: fi KN: fi 

NOM: NA SV: tỉ SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The sole example appears in a 
genealogy linked to Shōtoku Taishi: 俾支 Pyeki. Reading 俾 as pye may 
ultimately go back to Sino-Paekche, as this is a Later Han-based reading. In 
Izumo fudoki we find a shrine in the Ou District called 都俾志呂社 Tupyesiro 
Shrine. Also, the name of an individual written 俾都久辰爲命 Pyetukusiwi 
[NO] MIKOTO appears in a story related to Shimane District in Izumo. This graph 
also appears in the genealogical section of Kujiki (Book 5) in the name 阿俾良 
依姫 Apyera YORI PIMYE. It is possible, though difficult to determine, if this 
final name is Apira instead of Apyera. For the moment I place this name here. A 
mokkan excavated from the Fujiwara Palace ruins (fl. 694–710) contains this 
name: 漆部佐俾支 NURIBYE Sapyeki (MK 1497). Another mokkan contains 
this fragment: 委佐俾三升 ‘three MASU of wasabe’ (MKK 25:46). On the face 
of it, this should be wisapye, but no such word exists. The graph 委 often is an 
abbreviated form of 倭, so it seems safer to assume this is a form of wasabi 
‘Japanese horseradish.’ 

 

邊 


OJ: pye OC: *pên 

LH: pen EMC: pien GO: femu KN: fen 

NOM: biên, bên, ven SV: biên SK: pen 

Usage / History: 

This graph is usually interpreted as a kungana, suggesting to the reader OJ 
pye ‘shore, vicinity, side.’ However, as the EMC reading of 邊 is pien, it seems 
almost as plausible that this graph is simply a phonogram, and the final nasal was 
ignored. Perhaps the Sino-Japanese reading and the semantics matched so tightly 
that this phonogram could have been used both as a phonogram and a kungana. I 
treat it as a phonogram, because I would argue that the phonogram and the 
kungana have became confused because of homophony. 

It appears as early as the EJS, to transcribe the name of Yōmei. In some early 
documents the name of the palace, Ikenopye, is transcribed 池邊大宮 Great 
Palace of IKE [NO] pye. Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu writes the palace name of 
Yōmei as 伊波礼池邊双槻宮 ‘the Ipare IKE [NO] pye NAMITUKWI Palace.’ 

This phonogram also appears in Kojiki, but primarily in toponyms and 
personal names: 邊疎神。次邊津那藝佐毘古神。次邊津甲斐辨羅神 ‘The 


deity PyeZAKARU, next the deity PyeTU nagisabikwo, next the deity PyeTU 
KAPIbyera’ (KG). 

Likewise, this phonogram appears in Nihon shoki to transcribe toponyms and 
names: 大 戸 之 邊 OPOTWONOpye (NSG), 大 富 邊 尊 OPOTOMIpye [NO] 
MIKOTO (NSG), 級長戸邊命 SINA NATWOpye [NO] MIKOTO (NSG). 

 

反 


OJ: pye OC: *panʔ 

LH: puanʔ EMC: pjwɐnʔ GO: fomu, femu KN: fan 

NOM: phản SV: phản, phan, phiên SK: pen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage appears six times, all in 
Book 15 of Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3706 

多麻之家流 tama sikyeru Though it is a pretty beach 

伎欲吉奈藝佐乎 kiywoki nagisa wo like one spread with jewels, 

之保美弖婆 sipo miteba the tide had come in, 

安可受和礼由久 akazu ware yuku so I will go unfulfilled; 

可反流左尓見牟 kapyerusa ni MImu perhaps I will see it when I return. 

As Ōno (1962:501) has already noted, all six example appear in the verb 
kapyeru ‘to return,’ so this usage is a semantic play, as 反 includes the meaning 
‘return.’ 

 

返 


OJ: pye OC: *panʔ 

LH: puanʔ EMC: pjwɐnʔ GO: femu KN: fan 

NOM: phản SV: phản SK: pan 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It only appears twice in Book 5 of 
Man’yōshū to represent pye. 

MYS 854 

多麻之末能 tamasima no We have a house here, 

許能可波加美尓 kono kapakami ni upstream of this river, 

伊返波阿礼騰 ipye pa aredo Tamashima, 

吉美乎夜佐之美 kimi wo yasasimi but we were ashamed of you 

阿良波佐受阿利吉 arapasazu ariki and did not disclose it. 

This rather rare usage of 伊返 ipye ‘house’ is also a semantic pun, being 
read ‘s/he returns,’ pointing to where people return. 

According to Ōno (1962:501), there is also an example in Man’yōshū, where 
this phonogram is read pyeni: 邊都返者 阿遅村動 奥邊者 鴨妻喚 pyetu pye 
niPA / adi MURA SAWAKI / OKIpye NIPA / KAMO TUMA YOBAPI ‘on the beach a flock 
of teal are noisy, while out in the offing wild ducks call for their mates…’ (MYS 
260). However, as far as I can tell, all manuscripts have 遍 or a variation of this, 
but not 返, which would invalidate this example. 

 

遍 


OJ: pye, pyeni OC: *pêns 

LH: penh EMC: pienh GO: femu KN: fen 

NOM: biến SV: biẽn SK: pyen 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only in Man’yōshū, once in 
the name 許遍麻呂 Kopye Maro (MYS 1589). In the poetry it appears three 
times, but it should be mentioned that there are numerous cases of 千遍, which 
are glossed as TITABI ‘a thousand times’ or 二遍 PUTATABI ‘again, once 
more.’ Thus, the three cases in poetry I can find all represent pyeni. 

MYS 2026 

白雲 SIRAKUMWO NO Though over there is 

五百遍隠 IPOpye ni KAKURI hidden by five hundred layers 

雖遠 TOPOKU TOMO of white clouds that are distant, 

夜不去将見 YOPI SARAZU MIMU I will gaze at them each night, 

妹當者 IMWO GA ATARI PA out where my beloved lives. 

 

辧 


OJ: pye OC: *brans 

LH: bɨanh EMC: bjwänh LMC: pɦian GO: bemu KN: fen 

NOM: biện SV: biền SK: pyen, pan 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This phonogram was generally 
abbreviated to the simpler form of 弁. This phonogram appears four times in the 
Sakimori songs of Book 20 of Man’yōshū. 

MYS 4432 

佐弁奈弁奴 sapye napyenu As I cannot refuse 

美許登尓阿礼婆 mikoto ni areba the imperial command 

可奈之伊毛我 kanasi imwo ga I will leave the arm 

多麻久良波奈礼 tamakura panare of my beloved I slept upon— 

阿夜尓可奈之毛 aya ni kanasi mo I am extremely sad. 

 

平 


OJ: pye OC: *breŋ 

LH: bɨɛŋ EMC: bjɐŋ LMC: pɦiajŋ GO: biyau KN: pen, pei 

NOM: bình, bằng SV: bình SK: phyen, phyeng 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears the Chikuzen census of 702: 
平羣郡 ‘Pyeguri District.’ 

This phonogram also appears in Kojiki and Nihon shoki, but only to 
transcribe 平群 pyeguri. This graph is not used as a phonogram in Man’yōshū, 
perhaps to avoid ambiguity, as the graph was popular, used for the various nengō 
which contained 天平 tenpyō, or 平城 Heijō. 

 

覇 


OJ: pye OC: *prâkh or *phrâk 

LH: pah, phak EMC: pah, phɐk LMC: pɛ: GO: fa, fiyaku KN: fa, faku 

NOM: NA SV: bá SK: pha, poyk 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to CBS. There are three examples of this graph in 
Nihon shoki, all appearing in the same song: 

NSK 1 

夜句茂多兔 yakumo tatu Endowed with power 

伊弩毛夜覇餓岐 idumwo yapye gaki this two-fold Izumo fence— 


兔磨語味爾 tumagome ni To conceal ourselves, 

夜覇餓枳都倶盧 yapye gaki tukuru I have built this two-fold fence. 

贈廼夜覇餓岐廻 sono yapye gaki we Yes, within this two-fold fence! 

This phonogram appears twice in Book 5 of Man’yōshū: 

MYS 816 

烏梅能波奈 ume no pana You plum blossoms, 

伊麻佐家留期等 ima sakyeru goto won’t you stay in bloom 

知利須義受 tirisugwizu in the garden of my abode 

和我覇能曽能尓 wa ga pye no sono ni as you are now? 

阿利己世奴加毛 arikosenu kamo Do not scatter away. 

 

敝 


OJ: pye OC: *bets or *bes 

LH: bias EMC: bjiäih LMC: pɦjiaj GO: bei KN: fei 

NOM: tệ SV: tế, tệ SK: phyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It only appears in Man’yōshū, but it 
appears in the earliest sections of the anthology, in Books 1 and 2: 

MYS 21 

紫草能 MURASAKI no Like the purple grass 

尓保敝類妹乎 nipopyeru IMWO wo if I were to think evil of 

尓苦久有者 nikuku ARABA my blushing beloved, 

人嬬故尓 PITODUMA YUWE ni would I also yearn for 

吾戀目八方 ARE KWOPWIME YAMO another’s spouse like this? 

 

弊 


OJ: pye OC: *bets 

LH: bias EMC: bjiäih LMC: pɦjiaj GO: bei KN: fei 

NOM: tệ SV: tế, tệ SK: phyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears four times in the song of 
Nihon shoki: 

NSK 43 

阿豆瑳由瀰摩由瀰 adusayumi mayumi To make a true catalpa bow, 

伊枳羅牟苔 ikiramu to I thought in my heart, 

虚々呂破望閉耐 kokoro pa mopedo to cut down a catalpa tree. 

伊斗羅牟苔 itworamu to I thought in my heart 

虚々呂破望閉耐 kokoro pa mopedo to hold one of those trees. 

望苔幣破 motopye pa I thought of you 

枳瀰烏於望臂涅 kimi wo omopide at the trunk of the tree. 

須慧幣破 suwepye pa I remembered you 

伊暮烏於望比涅 imo wo omopide when I looked up at the crown. 

伊羅那鷄區 iranakyeku I felt such sorrow 

曾虚珥於望比 soko ni omopi thinking of you there. 

伽那志鷄區 kanasikyeku I felt such sadness 

虚々珥於望臂 koko ni omopi thinking about you here. 

伊枳羅儒層區屢 ikirazu so kuru I left without cutting down 

阿豆瑳由瀰摩由瀰 adusayumi mayumi the tree for the catalpa bow. 

This phonogram also appears in Books 4, 5, 17, 18, and 20 of Man’yōshū. 


MYS 794 

伊弊那良婆 ipye naraba If I were at home 

迦多知波阿良牟乎 katati pa aramu wo there would be proper form. 

宇良賣斯企 uramyesiki How regrettable 

伊毛乃美許等能 imwo no mikoto no my beloved— 

阿礼乎婆母 are woba mo what would you 

伊可尓世与等可 ika ni seyo to ka have me do? 

尓保鳥能 nipoDORI no Like the grebe 

布多利那良毘為 putari narabi wi we sat side by side 

加多良比斯 katarapisi and talked of things. 

許々呂曽牟企弖 kokoro somukite And going against your wishes 

伊弊社可利伊摩須 ipyezakari imasu I am here, having left home. 

 

幣 


OJ: pye OC: *bets 

LH: bias EMC: bjiäih LMC: pɦjiaj GO: bei KN: fei 

NOM: giẽ SV: tế, tệ SK: phyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. There is much graphic confusion 
between 弊 and 幣 in the various texts, so it is difficult to know which texts 
actually include which phonograms. Using data preserved on inscriptions on the 
Korean peninsula and in Japan, the original phonogram appears to be 弊 
(actually it is written 碵). Because of this, I have included all data for the 
phonogram under 弊 (see above). 

 

蔽 


OJ: pye OC: *pets 

LH: pias EMC: pjiäi LMC: pjiaj GO: feti, futi KN: fetu, futu 

NOM: NA SV: tế SK: phyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This graph appears solely in Nihon 
shoki, and only once in an annotational note: 後方羊蹄、此云斯梨蔽之 
“ ‘(The toponym) Sirihesi’ is siripyesi” (NSG). 

 

陛 


OJ: pye OC: *bî 

LH: beiʔ EMC: bieiʔ LMC: pɦjiaj GO: fei KN: fei 

NOM: bệ SV: bệ SK: phyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This phonogram appears three times in 
the annotational notes, and 16 times in song: 頭邊、此云摩苦羅陛 “ ‘By the 
head’ is read makurapye’ (NSG), 脚邊、此云阿度陛 “ ‘By the legs’ is read 
atwopye” (NSG). 

NSK 127 

於彌能古能 omi no kwo no The child of the vassal is 

野陛能比母騰倶 yapye no pimo toku about to untie the eight-layer cord. 

比騰陛多爾 pitopye dani Before he can untie 

伊麻拕藤柯泥波 imada tokanepa even one layer of the cord 

美古能比母騰矩 mikwo no pimo toku the prince has untied his cord. 

This phonogram appears once in Book 5 of Man’yōshū: 


MYS 844 

伊母我陛邇 imo ga pye ni How the plum blossoms 

由岐可母不流登 yuki kamo puru to swirl about so much 

弥流麻提尓 miru made ni that I think I see 

許々陀母麻我不 kokoda mo magapu that it must be snowing 

烏梅能波奈可毛 ume no pana kamo at the house of my beloved. 

 

鼙 


OJ: pye OC: *bê 

LH: be EMC: biei LMC: pɦiaj GO: bai KN: fei 

NOM: NA SV: bề SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and only appears once in Nihon shoki, 
in the following annotational note: 戸畔、此云妬鼙 “ ‘(The title) Tope’ is read 
twopye’ (NSG). 

 

鞞 


OJ: pye OC: *peʔ 

LH: pieʔ EMC: pjieʔ LMC: pji GO: fai KN: fei 

NOM: NA SV: tỳ SK: pi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, appearing only in Nihon shoki, four 
times, but all in the same song: 

NSK 124 

于知波志能 utipasi no Come out, child 

都梅能阿素弭爾 tume no aswobi ni to play at the edge of 

伊提麻栖古 idemase kwo the plank bridge. 

多麻提能伊鞞能 tamade no ipye no Mistress Yaheko of 

野鞞古能度珥 yapyekwo no twozi the Tamade House. 

伊提麻志能 idemasi no There will be no regrets 

倶伊播阿羅珥茹 kui pa arazi zo if you come out. 

伊提麻西古 idemase kwo Come out, child— 

多麻提能鞞能 tamade no ipye no Mistress Yaheko of 

野鞞古能度珥 yapyekwo no twozi the Tamade House. 

 

部 


OJ: pye OC: *bôʔ 

LH: boʔ EMC: bəuʔ GO: bu 

NOM: bộ, bõ SV: bộ SK: pwu 

Usage / History: 

See the same phonogram under OJ bye. 

 

重 


OJ: pye OC: *droŋʔ or *droŋ 

LH: ɖioŋʔ, ɖioŋ EMC: ɖjwoŋʔ, ɖjwoŋ GO: diu KN: diou 

NOM: trộng, chùng SV: trọng, trùng SK: cyung 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ pye ‘folds,’ as the graph 重 means ‘pile up, 
duplicate.’ The following example appears in Kojiki in names or toponyms: 八 
重言代主神 YAPYE KOTO SIRONUSI ‘deity Yae Koto Shironushi’ (KG), 三重村 
MIPYE [NO] MURA ‘village of Mie’ (KG), and 三重婇 MIPYE [NO] UNEMYE 


‘servant maidens from Mie’ (KG). Nihon shoki preserves much the same pattern, 
where 重 is used in conjunction with a number, representing a number of folds: 
八百重 YAPOPYE ‘eight hundred folds’ (NSG),三重郡 MIPYE [NO] KOPORI 
‘District of Mie (literally ‘three folds’)’ (NSG), 弟五百重娘 IRODO IPOPYE 
[NO] IRATUMYE ‘Princess Irodo Ihoe’ (NSG). 

Because of the heavy use of this graph to transcribe pye, when it was used in 
the name of Great Queen Kōgyoku: 天豐財重日足姫 AME [NO] TOYO TAKARA 
IKASIPI TARASI PIMYE, the editors of Shoki added the following note: 重日、此 
云伊柯之比 ‘The graphs ‘fold-sun’ are to be read ikasipi’ to help the reader 
avoid reading 重 as pye. 

 

隔 


OJ: pye OC: *krêk 

LH: kɛk EMC: kɛk GO: kiyaku KN: kaku 

NOM: cách SV: cách SK: kyek 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ pye, a part of the verb pyedatu ‘be 
partitioned.’ It appears twice in Man’yōshū. 吾戀 千重之一隔毛 遣悶流 情 
毛有八等 A GA KWOPURU / TIPYE NO PITOPYE mo / NAGUSAmoru / KOKORO mo 
ARIYA to ‘(thinking) she might have the intention to soothe even one 
thousandth of my yearning…’ (MYS 207). 吾戀流 千重乃一隔母 名草漏 
情毛有哉跡 A GA KWOPURU / TIPYE NO PITOPYE mo / NAGUSAMORU / KOKORO 
mo ARIYA TO ‘(Thinking) it will soothe even one thousandth of my yearning…’ 
(MYS 509). Interesting that different poems by different poets use essentially the 
same kind of logographic convention, suggesting that perhaps this was one 
popular way to represent this usage. 

 

伯 


OJ: pyeki OC: *prak 

LH: pak EMC: pɐk GO: fiyaku KN: faku 

NOM: bá SV: bách SK: pha, poyk 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears on a variety of mokkan dug up 
from the ruins of the Fujiwara Palace (fl. 694–710): 佐伯直国依 Sapyeki ATAPI 
KUNIYORI, and 佐伯直麻呂 Sapyeki ATAPI Maro. This usage appears 35 
times in Nihon shoki, mainly to represent Sapyeki (佐伯). This usage also 
appears in Man’yōshū, once for 佐伯山 sapyeki YAMA ‘Mount Saeki’ (MYS 
1259), and once in 大伴等 佐伯乃氏者 OPOTOMO to / sapyeki no UDI PA ‘the 
heredetiary families of the Ōtomo and Saeki…’ (MYS 4094). 

 

篇 


OJ: pyeni OC: *phen 

LH: phian EMC: phjiän GO: fen KN: fen 

NOM: thiên SV: biển SK: phyen 

Usage / History: 

This rare usage belongs to the LJS. I have only found one example in 
Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2558 

愛等 UTUKUSI to It seems that 

思篇来師 OMOpyeniKYERAsi you have feelings for me— 


莫忘登 NA WASURE to You said ‘Do not forget’ 

結之紐乃 MUSUBIsi PIMWO no but I think about the rope 

解樂念者 TOKUraku OMOPEBA you tied, and how it comes undone. 

Ōno (1962:500) argues that 篇 should be read pini, based on the somewhat 
convoluted reasoning based on rhyme dictionaries, but this can only be read 
pyeni. The other difficulty is that grammatically this cannot be omopye-ni-kyerwith 
a perfective ni there. That is why scholars interpret this stanza to be 
omopyeri-kyer-. For the time being, I leave the poem as is. It is possible that as 
both -r- and -n- are alveolars, the poet may have slurred the sound, like many do 
in modern Japanese, where wakaranai has become wakannai ‘I don’t know.’ 

 


R 

 

 

羅 



OJ: ra OC: *râi 

LH: lai > la EMC: lâ GO: ra KN: ra 

NOM: la, là SV: la SK: la 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Kwangkaytho stele: 
新羅 *sin-la (or *sil-la, with the nasal showing a liquid geminate), 古模耶羅城 
*kɔ-mo-ya-la fortress, 交羅城 *kau-la fortress, and 古家耶羅城 *kɔ-ka-ya-la 
fortress. It also appears on the Paekche Buddhist Pwun-san Wang-kung-li stele 
(pre-660): 阿耨多羅, which is a transcription for Anavatapta, a sacred place in 
Buddhism. 

This phonogram appears in quotes from Paekche historical material in Nihon 
shoki to write a variety of place names on the peninsula: 多々羅・素奈羅・弗 
知鬼・委陀・南迦羅・阿羅々六城 ‘The six fortresss of Tatara, Swonara, 
Potikuwi, Wada, Southern Kara, and Arara.’ 

This phonogram also appears in the earliest extant Japanese corpus, 
appearing in the name of Great King Kinmei, inscribed on the base of a pagoda 
from Gangōji: 阿米久爾意斯波羅岐比里爾波彌己等 Ame Kuni Osiparaki 
Pironipa Mikoto. In Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu, Great King Bidatsu’s name is 
preserved as 蕤奈久羅乃布等多麻斯支乃弥己等 Nunakura no Putotamasiki 
no Mikoto. This phonogram appears on a number of mokkan: 此番止羅无 KORE 
pa toramu ‘I will take this…’ (unnumbered tablet), 知夫利評由羅五十戸 
‘Tiburi District Yura Village of fifty households’ (MKK 19:22). 

This phonogram is also quite popular in Kojiki, though 良 is the primary 
graph used to transcribe ra. Interstingly this phonogram, while appearing in a 
number of names and words, only appears in one poem. It appears in words such 
as 御 美 豆 羅 MImitura ‘male type of hair style’ (KG), 天 津 麻 羅 
AMATUmara, a heavenly deity who represents blacksmiths (KG), and 天之羅 
摩船 AMA NO ramaBUNE ‘the heavenly Rama boat’ (KG). 

KK 53 

淤岐幣迩波 okipye ni pa There are boats 

袁夫泥都羅羅玖 wobune turaraku lined up out in the offing. 

久漏邪夜能 kurwozaya no Black like a sheath 

摩佐豆古和藝毛 masadukwo wagimwo my beautiful beloved, 

玖迩幣玖陀良須 kunipye kudarasu she heads for her home. 

This is the primary graph in Nihon shoki to transcribe ra, used in 28 
annotational notes, and 99 times in the poetry: 美飮喫哉、此云于魔羅儞烏野 
羅甫屢柯倭 “ ‘oh, how to drink’ is read umara ni wo yarapuruga wa” (NSG). 

NSK 103 

摩蘇餓豫 maswoga yo Truly you are the Swoga, 

蘇餓能古羅破 swoga no kwora pa the posterity of the Swoga— 

宇摩奈羅麼 uma naraba if you were horses, 

譬武伽能古摩 pimuka no kwoma then steeds of Himuka you would be. 


多智奈羅麼 tati naraba If you were swords, 

勾禮能摩差比 kure no masapi then blades of Koryŏ you would be. 

宇倍之訶茂 ubesi kamo How true this is. 

蘇餓能古羅烏 swoga no kwora wo That must be why 

於朋枳瀰能 opokimi no the posterity of the Swoga 

菟伽破須羅志枳 tukapasurasiki serve the great lord. 

This phonogram is used 24 times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1231 

天霧相 AMAGWIRAPI It seems that the sky is misty 

日方吹羅之 PIKATA PUKUrasi with rain and a southerly blowing. 

水莖之 MIDUKUKWI NO The waves are rising all over 

岡水門尓 WOKA NO KADWO ni the inlet of the river 

波立渡 NAMITATI WATARU at Woka, a place of grass stalks. 

 

邏 


OJ: ra OC: *râi 

LH: lɑi > lɑ EMC: la GO: ra KN: ra 

NOM: lạ SV: lá SK: la 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in Koguryŏgi in reference to 
a military position: 諸小城置可邏達比長史…其武官曰大模達、比衛将軍、 
一名莫何邏繍支 “In the various minor fortresses (the court) has established 
karadat, which is comparable to the post of Deputy Governor…The military 
officer is called Great mudat, which is comparable to the post of Defense 
General; this post is also called Makgarasiuke (Takeuchi 1977:34). There is also 
an example of this on the Silla Namsan stele (ca. 591) in a name: 阿良邏 *alala. 
Perhaps because of the high stroke count of this graph, it does not appear in any 
Japanese texts, other than Nihon shoki. Likely most writers would have used the 
more economical 羅. The phonogram 邏 is used in nine annotational notes, and 
18 times in poetry in Nihon shoki: 希見、此云梅豆邏志 “ ‘a rare thing’ is read 
medurasi” (NSG). 

NSK 28 

烏智箇多能 wotikata no In the direction of the thinly 

阿邏々麻菟麼邏 arara matubara wooded pine grove, 

摩菟麼邏珥 matubara ni we will venture across 

和多利喩祇氐 watari yukite that pine grove. 

菟區喩彌珥 tukuyumi ni Using zelkova bows with 

末利椰塢多具陪 mariya wo tagupe sounding arrowhead arrows, 

宇摩比等破 umapito pa those of noble birth 

于摩譬苔奴知野 umapito dwoti ya will fight with their own kind. 

伊徒姑播茂 itwokwo pa mo Men with relatives 

伊徒姑奴池 itwokwo dwoti will fight together. 

伊裝阿波那 iza apana Commence the battle, 

和例波 ware pa shall we? 

多摩岐波屢 tamaki paru Minister Uti, 

于池能阿層餓 uti no aso ga possessing a strong spirit, 

波邏濃知波 paranuti pa does not have a stomach 

異佐誤阿例椰 isagwo are ya made of pebbles. 


伊裝阿波那 iza apana Commence the battle, 

和例波 ware pa shall we? 

There is also an extremely graph that appears to be a mixture of 邏 and 蘿, 
where the scribe writes 邏 with 艹. This extremely rare graph appears twice in 
the first book of Nihon shoki, in an annotational note. The editors of Jidai betsu 
kokugo daijiten (1967:902) are the only source I can locate that make mention of 
this phonogram, as neither Ōno (1977:793) nor Mori (1991:257) make mention 
of it. I thus put mention of it here. The annotational note is: 蹴散、此云倶穢簸 
邏邏箇須 “ ‘kick and scatter,’ this is to be read kuwepararakasu” (NSG). For 
the time being, I leave this phonogram here in the dictionary. 

 

良 


OJ: ra, ragi OC: *raŋ 

LH: liaŋ EMC: ljaŋ GO: rau KN: riyau 

NOM: lương SV: lương SK: lyang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Silla Namsan stele (ca. 
591) in 阿良村 *ala village, and in part of a name and title: 阿良邏 *alala. It 
also appears in the Nihon shoki, in the name of a temple architect sent over from 
Paekche, mentioned in the record of Sushun: 太良未太 Dara Mwida. Nihon 
shoki also mentions an envoy from Silla in the record of Tenmu named 奈末加 
良井山 Kara Tsieŋsen. 

This phonogram appears in the earliest extant Japanese corpus, in names 
such as 等由良宮 Toyura Palace (Gangōji temple record) or 伊自牟良 
Izimura (Jōgūki fragment). It also appears in a poem preserved in Jōgū Shōtoku 
hōō teisetsu, written supposedly not long after the death of Prince Shōtoku. 

伊加留我乃 ikaruga no Here in Ikaruga, 

己能加支夜麻乃 kono kakiyama no surrounded by the mountains: 

佐可留木乃 sakaruKWI no I implore my master, 

蘇良奈留許等乎 swora naru koto wo but my desire is vain. 

支美尓麻乎佐奈 kimi ni mawosana like the sky is empty. 

This phonogram appears 16 times in the liturgies: 神直日命大直日命聞直 
志見直志弖平良気久安良気久所知食登白 KAMUNAPOBI [NO] MIKOTO 
OPONAPOBI [NO] MIKOTO KIKINAPOsi MINAPOsite TAPIrakeku YASUrakeku 
SIROSIMESE to MAWOSU “(If there are any omissions), the deities Kamunaobi and 
Ōnaobi will hear and rectify, see and rectify, and be tranquil and at peace” (NT 
8). This phonogram appears on many mokkan: 布久良 pukura ‘?’ (unnumbered 
tablet), 知夫利郡由良里軍 ‘the militia of Yura Village of Tiburi District’ 
(MKK 5:85), 麻須良女 MasuraMYE (MK 1958). 

This is the principal phonogram to transcribe ra for poetry in Kojiki: 

KK 58 

都藝泥布夜 tuginepu ya How the peaks continue— 

夜麻斯呂賀波袁 yamasirogawa wo sailing up the Yamashiro River 

美夜能煩理 miya nobori to the palace, 

和賀能煩禮婆 wa ga noboreba as I sailed upstream 

阿袁迩余志 awo ni yosi I passed Nara 

那良袁須疑 nara wo sugwi good that it is green. 


袁陀弖 wodate I passed Yamato 

夜麻登袁須疑 yamato wo sugwi like a small shield. 

和賀美賀本斯久迩波 wa ga migapwosi kuni pa The land I desire to see 

迦豆良紀多迦美夜 kadurakwi takamiya is Takamiya in Kazuraki; 

和藝幣能阿多理 wagipye no atari the area around my house. 

This is the primary phonogram used to transcribe ra in Man’yōshū, appearing 
1286 times. 

MYS 865 

伎弥乎麻都 kimi wo matu Are the young maidens 

麻都良乃于良能 matura no ura no who pine for their lord at 

越等賣良波 wotomyera pa Pine Bay, Matsura, 

等己与能久尓能 tokoyo no kuni no young women divers 

阿麻越等賣可忘 ama wotomye kamo of the eternal land? 

This phonogram also appears in the poems of the Bussoku stone: 

BSS 3 

与伎比止乃 yoki pito no I cannot see 

麻佐米尓美祁牟 masame ni mikyemu even the footprints that 

美阿止須良乎 miato sura wo the righteous men must 

和礼波衣美須弖 ware pa emisute have seen before their eyes— 

伊波尓惠利都久 ipa ni werituku engrave them on the rock. 

多麻尓惠利都久 tama ni werituku Engrave them on the jewel. 

Shoku Nihongi contains the toponym 同 國 久良郡 ‘same province 
(Musashi) Kuragi District’ (768.6.21). The velar nasal is used to represent -gi. 

 

浪 


OJ: ra OC: *râŋ 

LH: laŋ EMC: lâŋ GO: rau KN: rau 

NOM: lảng, lãng SV: lang, lãng SK: lang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and it appears only three times in 
Man’yōshū. 

MYS 4390 

牟浪他麻乃 muratama no Having made a firm promise, 

久留尓久枳作之 kuru ni kugi sasi as a door pivoting on a nail— 

加多米等之 katametosi like a cluster of jewels, 

以母加去々里波 imo ga kokoro pa my beloved’s heart will 

阿用久奈米加母 aywokuname kamo probably not be moved. 

 

郎 


OJ: ra OC: *râŋ 

LH: laŋ EMC: lâŋ GO: rau KN: rau 

NOM: lang, sang SV: lang SK: lang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in the name 一難寳郎 
Itinan Pora, a descendant of Paekche who lived in the Paekche District of Settsu. 
He is the copyist of the extant manuscript of Madhyamāgama. 

 


廊 


OJ: ra OC: *râŋ 

LH: laŋ EMC: lâŋ GO: rau KN: rau 

NOM: lang, làng, láng SV: lang, làng SK: lang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, found in the name 一難寳廊 Ichinan 
Pora. He is the copyist of the extant manuscript of Madhyamāgama. 

 

莨 


OJ: ra OC: *râŋ 

LH: lɑŋ EMC: laŋ GO: rau KN: rau 

NOM: NA SV: lương SK: lang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in the name 甘莨 Kamura 
in a document preserved in the Shōsōin. The name is written 甘良 Kamura in 
other documents. 

 

囉 


OJ: ra OC: *râi 

LH: lɑi > lɑ EMC: la GO: ra KN: ra 

NOM: la, ra SV: la SK: la 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only in Nihon shoki, 
appearing in six times in poetry: 

NSK 85 

阿佐膩簸囉 asadipara Through the rocky path of 

嗚贈禰嗚須擬 wosone wo sugwi the mountains and over 

謨謀逗頴甫 momodutapu Asaji Plain comes a distant, 

奴底喩羅倶慕與 nute yuraku mo yo continuous jingle of a bell. 

於岐毎倶羅之慕 okime kurasi mo It seems Okime has arrived. 

 

攞 


OJ: ra OC: *râi 

LH: lɑi > lɑ EMC: la GO: ra KN: ra 

NOM: rà SV: NA SK: la 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only once in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 98 

比攞哿駄喩 pirakata yu Heqading up through 

輔曳輔枳能朋樓 puye puki noboru the port of Hirakata 

阿符美能野 apumi no ya someone plays a flute. 

愷那能倭倶吾伊 kena no wakugwo i It is young Kena of Afumi, 

輔曳符枳能朋樓 puye puki noboru playing as he rows upstream. 

 

𡤢 


OJ: ra OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: la GO: ra KN: ra 

NOM: NA SV: la SK: la 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in Shoku Nihongi in a 
toponym in Ōsumi: 株日向國肝坏贈於、大隅、姶𡤢四郡、始置大隅國 ‘The 
four districts of KIMOTUKI, Soo, OPOSUMI, and Apira were cut out from 


PIMUKA and (the court) established the province of OPOSUMI for the first time’ 
(713.4.3). 

 

𧟌 


OJ: ra OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: la GO: ra KN: ra 

NOM: NA SV: la SK: la 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in Shoku Nihongi: 大隅隼 
人姶𧟌郡 ‘OPOSUMI PAYATO of Apira District’ (729.7.22). Some manuscripts 
have this as 姶𡤢, so it is difficult to know which is the archetype. For the time 
being I leave it as is. 

 

樂 


OJ: ra, raka, raki, raku OC: *râuk 

LH: lak EMC: lâk GO: raku KN:raku 

NOM: lạc SV: lạc SK: lak 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in the mythical story on the 
Kwangkaytho stele, where the king is named 永樂 *waŋ-lak, named after a 
mythical king of the same name. It should be noted, however, that this reading is 
speculation, because the phonogram 樂 has two different readings, lè and yuè, 
the first meaning ‘joy’ and the second ‘music.’ These two are surely ultimately 
related, but by the Later Han period they had different readings. 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, in the record of Buretsu, 
transcribing the name of Mount Nara: 乃樂山 Mount Narak. Some have argued 
that this is simply Nara, with the -k ignored. It is interesting to note that in the 
Nintoku record the current manuscripts of Nihon shoki have 那羅山 Mount 
Nara, but Shiki notes that an earlier version (an earlier stage of the compilation?) 
of Shoki had 乃樂山 here, also. This same usage is seen on a stele at the Taianji 
Temple (dated 775): 乃樂之京 ‘the metropolis of Narak.’ This phonogram 
appears on several mokkan: 山背国相楽郡 YAMASIRO Province Sagaraka 
District (MKK 20:39). 

This phonogram also appears once in Kojiki in a related though interesting 
writing: 山代國之相樂 Sagaraka of YAMASIRO Province (KG). Here 樂 
represents raka, but this is still based on the Chinese lak, with an echo vowel a-. 
This same transcription appears in the Kinmei section of Shoki: 相樂郡 
Sagaraka District (NSG) and 相 樂 館 sagaraka [NO] MUROTWUMWI 
‘government building of Sagaraka’ (NSG). 

Shoku Nihongi preserves an example of raki: the district name 邑樂郡 
glossed as Oparaki (769.4.27). This transcription is supported by the later usage 
in Wamyōshō, where the district is transcribed 於波良岐 oparaki. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū. There are a number of examples 
of ‘the palace of Nara’ transcribed as 寧樂宮. This phonogram is also used in 
the poetry to transcribe either raku (MYS 992) or raka (MYS 481): 

MYS 992 

古郷之 PURUSATWO NO I still yearn for 

飛鳥者雖有 ASUKA PA AREDO Asuka, the old capital, 

青丹吉 AWO NI YOSI but Asuka in Nara 


平城之明日香乎 NARA NO ASUKA wo of the blue hills 

見樂思好裳 MIrakusi YOSI MO is indeed beautiful to look at. 

MYS 481 

山代乃 YAMASIRO no You went out to 

相樂山乃 sagaraka YAMA no and then through the valley 

山際 YAMA NO MA NI of Mount Sagaraka 

徃過奴礼婆 YUKISUGWInureba in Yamashiro…. 

 

落 


OJ: raku OC: *râk 

LH: lak EMC: lâk GO: raku KN: raku 

NOM: lạc SV: lạc SK: lak 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only in Man’yōshū to 
transcribe raku, of which there are only three examples. 

MYS 3246 

天有哉 AME NARU YA The lord I yearn for is 

月日如 TUKWIPI NO GOTOKU like the sun and the moon, 

吾思有 A GA OMOPYERU those heavenly orbs— 

君之日異 KIMI GA PI KE NI how regretful that he grows older 

老落惜文 OYUraku WOSI mo with each passing day. 

 

覽 


OJ: ramu OC: *râmʔ 

LH: lamʔ EMC: lâm GO: ramu KN: ramu 

NOM: lãm SV: lãm SK: lam 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage appears only in Man’yōshū, 
in five poems, always used to transcribe the tentative suffix -ramu. 

MYS 1856 

我刺 WA GA KAZASU The wind rustles the string 

柳絲乎 YANAGWI NO ITWO wo of the willow branch 

吹乱 PUKIMIDARU I have stuck in my hair. 

風尓加妹之 KAZE ni ka IMWO GA Will the plum blossom decorating 

梅乃散覽 UME no TIRUramu my beloved’s hair scatter? 

 

藍 


OJ: ramu OC: *râm 

LH: lam EMC: lâm GO: ramu KN: ramu 

NOM: lam, chàm, xám SV: lam SK: lam 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It only appears in Man’yōshū three 
times. 

MYS 910 

神柄加 KAMUKARA ka Is it according to 

見欲賀藍 MIGAPOSIKAramu the will of the deities 

三吉野乃 MIYOSINWO no that they want to see it? 

瀧乃河内者 TAKI no KAPUTI PA I do not tire of gazing at 

雖見不飽鴨 MIREDO AKANU KAMO the banks of the Miyoshino falls. 


濫 


OJ: ramu OC: *râms 

LH: lamh EMC: lâmh GO: ramu KN: ramu 

NOM: làm, rộm, trộm SV: lạm SK: lam 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram only appears in 
Man’yōshū a total of 12 times. 

MYS 651 

久堅乃 PISAKATA no The heavenly dew has fallen 

天露霜 AME NO TUYU SIMWO from the long and hard skies. 

置二家里 OKInikyeri Does the person 

宅有人毛 IPYE NARY PITO mo who is at home 

待戀奴濫 MATIKWOPWInuramu yearn because of this chill? 

 

臘 


OJ: rapu OC: *râp 

LH: lap EMC: lâp GO: rafu KN: rafu 

NOM: chap SV: lạp, chạp SK: lap 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Man’yōshū only once, and 
then in a corrupted form. As Ōno (1962:524) explains this poem uses a variant 
graph, 臈 for 臘. 

MYS 1273 

住吉 SUMINOYE NO The riding coat 

波豆麻公之 paduma NO KIMI GA of Lord Hazuma of Suminoe 

馬乗衣 UMA NORI KOROMO is a garment sewn by 

雜豆臈 SAPIDUrapu a foreign girl 

漢女乎座而 AYAMYE wo SUWETE with chirping speech 

縫衣叙 NUPYERU KOROMO zo that he made sit and sew. 

 

例 


OJ: re OC: *rats 

LH: lias > liah EMC: ljäih GO: re KN: rei 

NOM: lệ, lề SV: lệ SK: lyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in an interesting title for the 
king of Sin: 辰王治月支國、臣智或加優呼臣雲遣支報安邪踧支濆臣離兒不 
例拘邪秦支廉之號 “The Sin (*dźɨn) King rules the land of *nGyɑt-ke, and has 
the title of *Gin-teh or they even lengthen it out as *Gin-wun-khianʔ-ke-pouhan-
ya-tsuk-ke-bun-gin-liɑh-ńe-pu-liah-kou-ya-dzin-ke-lem.” 

This phonogram appears on a wooden document excavated in Hamamatsu 
City in Shizuoka: 刑部宇例志 WOSAKABYE Uresi (MKK 30:202). This 
phonogram appears in Nihon shoki, where it is the primary phonogram used to 
transcribe re, appearing in three annotational notes, and 42 times in poetry: 肩巾 
此云比例 “ ‘shoulder scarf’ is read pire” (NSG). 

NSK 63 

夜輸瀰始之 yasumisisi Our great sovereign 

和我於朋枳瀰波 wa ga opokimi pa who rules the eight quarters 

于陪儺于陪儺 ube na ube na has spoken reasonably 

和例烏斗波輸儺 ware wo twopasu na by asking this question of me. 


阿企菟辭摩 akitusima But I have not heard 

揶莽等能倶珥々 yamato no kuni ni anything about a goose 

箇利古武等 kari kwomu to having laid an egg 

和例破枳箇儒 ware pa kikazu in the land of Yamato. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, found in Books 5, 12, 14, 16, 18, 
and 20 a total of 41 times. 

MYS 4344 

和須良牟弖 wasuramute I came here 

努由伎夜麻由伎 nwo yuki yama yuki trying to forget them— 

和例久礼等 ware kuredo over fields and mountains, 

和我知々波々波 wa ga titi papa pa but I cannot forget 

和須例勢努加毛 wasuresenu kamo my father and mother. 

 

禮 


OJ: re OC: *rîʔ 

LH: leiʔ EMC: lieiʔ GO: rai KN: rei 

NOM: lãi, rẽ, rảy, trễ SV: lễ SK: lyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Silla Namsan Stele 
(591), found in the fragment of one name: □叱禮干文尺□ *X-tsit-lei-kɑnmun-
tsiak-X. This phonogram also appears in Paekche material quoted in Nihon 
shoki: 阿利那禮河 Arinare River, which according to the Jingū record is a river 
in Silla, but this is clearly a transcription from Paekche, as nare is a Paekche 
word for ‘river,’ so the word was spliced into Nihon shoki without careful 
consideration. The name actually means ‘the river Ari.’ There is also 汙禮斯伐 
Ure Sipot, an envoy for the Silla King. Also, in the record of Keitai, Kena no 
Omi, who is on the peninsula builds a fortress called 久禮牟羅城 Kuremura 
Fortress. In the record of Kinmei there is also a mountain called 久禮山 Mount 
Kure. 

This phonogram is preserved in some of the earliest Japanese records. There 
are two examples of transcriptions for the toponym Ipare (modern Iware): 伊波 
禮 and 夷波禮. This phonogram appears six times in the liturgies, every 
example for -reru: 四方國乃進礼留御調乃荷前乎取並弖 YOMO [NO] KUNI no 
TATEMATUreru MITUKI no NOSAKI wo TORINARABEte “And line up the tribute of 
first fruits that are presented from the provinces from the four directions…” (NT 
6). This phonogram also appears on a number of mokkan: 多礼留波久留万 
tareru pakuruma ‘carriages that are sufficient (in number)? hanging pinwheels?’ 
(MK 3299), 目毛美須流安保連紀我許等乎志宜見賀毛美夜能宇知可礼弖 
MATUGE misuru APO MURAZI Ki ga koto wo sigeMI kamo miya no uti karete 
‘Apo Murazi Ki who is showing his eyelashes, alas, is noisy and leaves the inner 
chambers of the palace…’ (unnumbered tablet). 

This is the principal phonogram used to transcribe re in Kojiki: 姓稗田名阿 
禮 “A person with the surname PIYEDA, named Are” (KG), 神倭伊波禮毘古 
天皇 Great King KAMU YAMATO Iparebikwo (KG), 宇士多加禮許呂呂岐弖 
uzi takare kororokite ‘maggots had gathered and were squirming about’ (KG). 

KK 56 

夜麻登幣迩 yamatopye ni A west wind blows 

爾斯布岐阿宜弖 nisi pukiagete up toward Yamato, 


玖毛婆那禮 kumwobanare and the clouds separate 

曾岐袁理登母 soki woritomo hither and thither in the distance, 

和禮和須禮米夜 ware wasureme ya but I will not forget you. 

This phonogram is generally avoided by the Nihon shoki scribes, and it does 
not appear in poetry or annotational notes. It is used three times in Nihon shoki to 
transcribe names. In a story where the Great King sends envoys to travel to Kure, 
a Chinese state, they get lost and ask the way. The two people who give them 
directions have kure in their names: 久禮波 Kurepa 久禮志 Kuresi. 

This phonogram is the principal graph to transcribe re in Man’yōshū, used a 
total of 698 times. 

MYS 32 

古 INISIPYE NO Am I a person 

人尓和礼有哉 PITO ni ware ARE YA from the ancient past? 

樂浪乃 SASANAMI no It saddens me 

故京乎 PURUKI MIYAKWO wo to look at the remains 

見者悲寸 MIREBA KANASIKI of the old capital at Sasanami. 

This phonogram is the principal phonogram to represent re in the Bussoku 
poetic sequence. 

BSS 10 

己礼乃与波 kore no yo pa Even though this world 

宇都利佐留止毛 uturisaru tomo should change and pass away, 

止己止婆尓 tokotopa ni let these footprints remain 

佐乃己利伊麻世 sanokori imase true on the eternal rock! 

乃知乃与乃多米 noti no yo no tame For those in future generations. 

麻多乃与乃□□ mata no yo no X X For generations yet to come…. 

 

連 


OJ: re OC: *ranʔ or *renʔ 

LH: lianʔ EMC: ljänʔ GO: remu KN: ren 

NOM: liên, liền, len SV: liên SK: lyen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS, appearing in the name 古連旦涇之水 
the Ko-len Tan-geŋ River, a river near or in Paekche territory. 

Perhaps because of the final -n this phonogram was generally avoided. It 
appears once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 3939 

佐刀知加久 satwo tikaku How I hate myself 

伎美我奈里那婆 kimi ga narinaba for the unfounded thought 

古非米也等 kwopwime ya to that my longing for you 

母登奈於毛比此 motona omopisi would subside if you 

安連曽久夜思伎 are so kuyasiki were to return closer to home. 

 

列 


OJ: re OC: *rat 

LH: liat EMC: ljät GO: reti KN: retu 

NOM: liệt, rệt SV: liệt SK: lyel 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram only appears only five 
times in Man’yōshū. 


MYS 822 

和何則能尓 wa ga sono ni The plum blossoms 

宇米能波奈知流 ume no pana tiru in my garden are scattering. 

比佐可多能 pisakata no Or is it that snow 

阿米欲里由吉能 ame ywori yuki no is falling from heaven, 

那何列久流加母 nagarekuru kamo which is so far away. 

 

烈 


OJ: re OC: *rat 

LH: liat EMC: ljät GO: reti KN: retu 

NOM: lét, lẹt, lướt SV: liệt SK: lyel 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 3250 

戀烈鴨 KWOPUre KAMO I yearn for you 

心痛 KOKORO NO ITAKI and my heart is in pain. 

末逐尓 SUWE TUPI ni If I am not to meet you 

君丹不會者 KIMI NI APAZU PA from this time forth 

吾命乃 WA GA INOTI no then I will live 

生極 IKERAMU KIPAMI the rest of my life 

戀乍文 KWOPWITUTU mo longing for you. 

 

戻 


OJ: re OC: *rît, rîts 

LH: let, les EMC: liet, lieih LMC: liaj GO: rai KN: rei 

NOM: NA SV: lệ SK: lye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears only once in Nihon shoki: 
poem. 

NSK 4 

憶企都茂播 okitu mwo pa It comes to the shore 

陛爾播譽戻耐母 pye ni pa yoredomo the seaweed in the offing; 

佐禰耐據茂 sanedoko mo but my wife comes not— 

阿黨播怒介茂譽 atapanu kamo yo refusing to give me a bed. 

播磨都智耐理譽 pamatutidori yo Ah, the plovers on the beach! 

 

黎 


OJ: re OC: *rî 

LH: lei EMC: lɛj LMC: liaj GO: rai KN: rei 

NOM: lê SV: lê SK: lye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears only in Nihon shoki, once in 
an annotational note, and five times in poetry: 慨哉、此云宇黎多棄伽夜 
“ ‘how heart rending’ is read uretaki ka ya” (NSG). 

NSK 93 

於彌能姑能 omi no kwo no The son of the Omi has 

耶賦能之魔柯枳 yapu no sibagaki has made a brushwood fence. 

始陀騰余瀰 sita toyomi But if the earth quakes, 

那爲我與釐據魔 nawi ga yori koba that brushwood fence 

耶黎夢之魔柯枳 yaremu sibagaki will likely fall to pieces. 


廉 


OJ: remu OC: *rem 

LH: liam EMC: ljäm GO: remu KN: remu 

NOM: lèm, lim SV: liêm SK: lyem 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only once in Man’yōshū, and 
by using the final nasal -m, the poet uses this graph to transcribe remu. 

MYS 2487 

平山 NARA YAMA NO Like the tip of the branches 

子松末 KWOMATU GA URE NO of the small pine tree 

有廉叙波 uremu zo pa on Mount Nara— 

我思妹 A GA OMOPU IMWO how can I go on without 

不相止者 APAZU YAMINAMU seeing the beloved I yearn for? 

 

利 


OJ: ri OC: *rih 

LH: lih EMC: lih GO: ri KN: ri 

NOM: lì, lời, lợi SV: lợi, lị SK: li 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in the following: 彌彌那利 
*me-me-na-ri, an auxiliary title, 都市牛利 *tɔ-si-gu-ri, a personal name, and 
巴利 *pa-ri, a toponym. 

This phonogram also appears on the Kwangkaytho stele inscription: 幹弖利 
城 *kan-te-ri fortress, 古利城 *kɔ-ri fortress, 困利城 *kən-ri fortress, and 
也利城 *ya-ri fortress. It also appears in an inscription of a silver bracelet from 
the tomb of the King Munyeng of Paekche: 多利作 ‘Made by Tari.’ 

This phonogram is also found on the Inariyama tumulus sword inscription 
(ca. fifth century) in two names: 多加利足尼 Ta-ka-ri Sukune. 弖已加利獲居 
Te-yə Kari Waka. It is possible the second graph is actually 巳, as poor 
technique used to cut the graphs into the blade makes it hard to distinguish the 
two graphs (已 vs. 巳). If the second graph is actually the one intended, the 
name would be Te-zə Kari Waka. The graph also appears on the Suda Hachiman 
mirror inscription (ca. sixth century) in the name 今州利 *kɨm-tśu-lih. 

This phonogram is also found in the earliest texts of Japan. In the fragment 
from Jōgūki we find names such as 伊久牟尼利比古大王 Great King 
Ikumuneri Pikwo and 布利比彌 Puri Pimye. This phonogram appears 23 times 
in the liturgies: 足御世乃茂御世爾齋奉利常石爾堅石爾福閇奉利預而 TARASI 
MIYO no IKASI MIYO ni IPAPIMATUri,TOKIPA ni KAKIPA ni SAKIPApe MATUri, 
ADUKARIte “(We pray) that your reign be replete and magnificent, and blessed 
forever, like the eternal rocks, like the bedrock…” (NT 2). This phonogram 
appears on a number of mokkan: 布乃利 punori ‘seaweed glue’ (unnumbered 
tablet), 須々保利 susupori ‘greens to be pickled’ (MK 3261). 

It is interesting that this phonogram is never used in the conservative Kojiki, 
though the graph does appear twice, but is read twona. This phonogram is the 
primary graph to transcribe ri in Nihon shoki, used 14 times in annotational notes 
and 72 times in poetry: 白膠木、此云農利泥 “ ‘divine tree’ is read nuride” 
(NSG). 


NSK 6 

阿軻娜磨廼 akadama no The radiant globe 

比訶利播阿利登 pikari pa ari to is wonderfully brilliant, 

比鄧播伊珮耐 pito pa ipyedo so people may say, 

企弭我譽贈比志 kimi ga yosopisi but I have now realized 

多輔妬勾阿利計利 taputwoku arikyeri your brilliance is the finest. 

This phonogram appears in Man’yōshū a total of 325 times. 

MYS 3601 

之麻思久母 simasiku mo Is it possible 

比等利安里宇流 pitori ariuru for me to be alone for 

毛能尓安礼也 mono ni are ya even a little while? 

之麻能牟漏能木 sima no murwo no KWI The juniper tree on the island 

波奈礼弖安流良武 panarete aruramu stands all alone. 

The cursive form of this graph later yields hiragana り, while the last two 
strokes of this graph give us katakana リ. 

 

離 


OJ: ri OC: *rai 

LH: liai EMC: lje GO: ri KN: ri 

NOM: li, lì, lia, lìa, le, SV: li, ly, lị SK: li 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, and appears to have been used at the end 
of nouns to show some kind of suffixation of -i. Consider the following from Wei 
zhi: 卑奴母離 *pe-nɔ-mɔ-rai, where this appears to turn a verb into a nominal 
(*mor- ‘to protect’ > *morai > mori). If this supposition is correct, then perhaps 
certain other toponyms on the peninsula are also nominalized forms of verbs: 古 
離國 *kɔ-rai ‘growing fat?,’ 卑離國 *pe-rai ‘being humble,’ and 内卑離國 
*nəj pe-rai ‘humble baggage.’ 

This phonogram was not popular, perhaps because of its high stroke count. 
However, this phonogram does appear in Nihon shoki, four times in annotational 
notes, and in seven times in poetry: 嚴呪詛、此云怡途能伽辭離 “ ‘sacred, 
solemn spell’ is read itunokasiri” (NSG). 

NSK 41 

訶羅怒烏 karanwo wo The ship Karano 

之褒珥椰枳 sipwo ni yaki was burned to make salt. 

之餓阿摩離 si ga amari The leftover wood 

虚等珥菟句離 koto ni tukuri was used to make a lute. 

訶枳譬句梛 kaki piku ya When I strum on it 

由羅能斗能 yura no two no the sound is wonderful, 

斗那訶能異句離珥 twonaka no ikuri ni as the swaying of seaweed 

敷例多菟 puretatu on a rock jutting 

那豆能紀能 nadu no kwi no out in the Yura Straits— 

佐椰佐椰 saya saya saya saya. 

This phonogram is also preserved in a fragment from a quote of Hizen fudoki 
by Sengaku in his Man’yōshū chūshaku: 肥前國風土記云、松浦縣之東三十里 
有帔搖岑帔搖比禮府離 “Hizen fudoki records (1978:102), ‘MATURA District. Some 
30 miles to the east of this district is PIREPURI Peak. ‘PIREPURI’ is pirepuri.’ ” 

 


理 


OJ: ri, rowi OC: *rəʔ *m(ə).rəʔ § 

LH: liəʔ EMC: ljɨʔ GO: ri KN: ri 

NOM: lí, lý SV: lí, lý SK: li 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It appears on the Funa Obito epitaph 
(668): 安理故能刀自 Arikwo no Twozi ‘Lady Ariko.’ It also appears in the 
Mino Census of 702 in the name 久須理 Kusuri. This phonogram appears on a 
number of mokkan: 占部久須理 URABYE Kusuri (MK 342), 佐波理波 
sapari pa ‘as for the obstruction…?’ (MK 7:121). 

This is the principal phonogram used in Kojiki, which uses no other 
phonogram to represent ri: 訓分云久麻理 ‘The graph 分 “divide” is to be read 
kumari’ (KG), 多具理迩 taguri ni ‘(what appeared) from her vomit…’ (KG), 
and 訓入云能理 ‘The graph 入 “contain” is to be read nori’ (KG). 

KK 56 

夜麻登幣迩 yamatopye ni A west wind blows 

爾斯布岐阿宜弖 nisi pukiagete up toward Yamato, 

玖毛婆那禮 kumwobanare and the clouds separate 

曾岐袁理登母 soki woritomo hither and thither in the distance, 

和禮和須禮米夜 ware wasureme ya but I will not forget you. 

This phonogram is used in Nihon shoki, appearing four times in annotational 
notes, and eight times in poetry: 背揮、此云志理幣提爾布倶 “ ‘wielding a 
sword with a backhand’ is read siripye ni puku” (NSG). 

NSK 87 

之裒世能 sipwose no Looking at the line of waves 

儺嗚理嗚彌黎麼 nawori wi mireba driven by the brisk tide, 

阿蘇寐倶屢 aswobi kuru I see the fin 

思寐我簸多泥儞 sibi ga patade ni of a swimming tuna, 

都摩陀氐理彌喩 tuma tateri miyu where my spouse-to-be stands. 

This phonogram is used 149 times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 793 

余能奈可波 yo no naka pa When one comes to 

牟奈之伎母乃等 munasiki mono to the realization that life 

志流等伎子 siru toki si in this world is vain, 

伊与余麻須万須 iyoyo masu masu then the sadness one feels 

加奈之可利家理 kanasikarikyeri grows all the more profound. 

There is one other reading for this phonogram, and it is difficult to know 
where to place this usage, as it is only preserved in one toponym recorded in 
Shoku Nihongi: 物理郷 Motorowi Village (766.5.23). The reading of rowi (ロ 
ヰ) ultimately goes back to OC *m(ə).rəʔ. Miyake has argued that phonology of 
this graph originates from: *mʌ-rəʔ > *mʌ-rəʔ > *mʌ-rəʔ > *rəʔ > *rəɨʔ > *ləiʔ 
(Baxter and Sagart’s reconstruction is close to Miyake’s, [2014:349]). The *ləiʔ 
resulting from this third method of simplification may be the reading underlying 
the choice of 理 for Old Japanese *rəwi (Amritas blog, 10.7.2.2.36). This may 
suggest that it is a relic of a much earlier stratum, perhaps PBS. 

 


里 


OJ: ri OC: *rəʔ 

LH: liəʔ > ljɨʔ EMC: ljɨʔ GO: ri KN: ri 

NOM: lịa, lẽ SV: lí, lý SK: li 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. In earlier stages of orthographic usage, 
里 transcribed OJ ro. This usage appears in Nihon shoki in four annotational 
notes, and one poem: 賢遺、此云左舸能莒里 “ ‘the name Sakanokori’ is read 
sakanokori” (NSG). 

NSK 77 

擧暮利矩能 komoriku no Mount Hatsuse 

播都制能野麼播 patuse no yama pa hidden in the folds of the land 

伊底頴智能 idetati no is a wondrous sight 

與慮斯企野麼 yorosiki yama unfolding right before my door. 

和斯里底能 wasiride no A short run from the house— 

與慮斯企夜麼能 yorosiki yama the view of the wondrous peak, 

據暮利矩能 komoriku no Mount Hatsuse, 

播都制能野麼播 patuse no yama pa hidden in the folds of the land. 

阿野儞于羅虞波斯 aya ni uragupasi Ah, what a beautiful mountain. 

阿野儞于羅虞波斯 aya ni uragupasi Ah, what a beautiful mountain. 

This is the principal phonogram in Man’yōshū, appearing 560 times. 

MYS 3672 

比左可多能 pisakata no Illuminating the heavens 

月者弖利多里 TUKWI PA teritari the moon is shining. 

伊刀麻奈久 itwoma naku I can see the torches 

安麻能伊射里波 ama no izari pa of the fishermen 

等毛之安敝里見由 tomosi apyeri MIyu with their lights blending together. 

 

隣 


OJ: ri OC: *rin 

LH: lin EMC: ljen GO: rimu KN: rin 

NOM: lân SV: lân SK: lin 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only in Man’yōshū, and then 
only in two difficult poems; one is MYS 9, a cryptic poem I have addressed 
under 兄 OJ ye. The other poem is MYS 3242, which has some cryptic sections 
too. The graph 闕 appears in some manuscripts as 名闕 ‘the name is missing.’ 
This indicates that some scribes realized the stanza here was incomplete. I have 
only given the first section of the poem. 

MYS 3242 

百岐年 MWOMWOkine I heard that 

三野之國之 MINWO NO KUNI NO at the Takakita Palace 

高北之 TAKAKITA NO in Mino Province 

八十一隣之宮尓 KUKUri NO MIYA ni where there are many fields 

日向尓 PIMUKA ni that there was someone 

行靡闕矣 YUKI NABIKU ? WO who was walking humbly 

有登聞而 ARI to KIKITE facing the sun.... 

I have tried to illustrate how the final -n of 隣 rin introduces the following 
no with the idiosyncratic capitalization: nO. 


唎 


OJ: ri OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: li LMC: li GO: ri KN: ri 

NOM: lời SV: NA SK: li 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This rare phonogram only appears in 
Nihon shoki, and then in only three poems. 

NSK 96 

倭例以梨魔志 ware irimasi I went inside 

阿都圖唎 atwo twori and held her leg, 

都麼怒唎絁底 tumadworisite holding the edge of her hem, 

魔倶囉圖唎 makura twori holding her pillow— 

伊慕我堤嗚 imo ga te wo holding my spouse. 

倭例儞魔柯斯毎 ware ni makasime I wrapped her hand 

倭我堤嗚麼 wa ga te woba around my waist 

伊慕儞魔柯絁毎 imo ni makasime and she my arm— 

麼左棄逗囉 masakwidura wrapped it around her. 

多々企阿藏播梨 tataki azapari And like a vine, 

矢洎矩矢慮 sisikusiro we caressed, intertwined. 

于魔伊禰矢度儞 umai nesi two ni We slept deeply, 

儞播都等唎 nipatu tori sweet like meat on a skewer. 

柯稽播儺倶儺梨 kakye pa nakunari The fowl I keep 

奴都等利 nwotu tori have begun to cackle. 

枳蟻矢播等余武 kigisi pa toyomu And in the fields 

婆絁稽矩謨 pasikyeku mo the pheasants add their call. 

伊麻娜以播孺底 imada ipazute The dawn has already come 

阿開儞啓梨 akenikyeri before I have been able 

倭蟻慕 wagimo to confess my feelings, my love. 

 

梨 


OJ: ri OC: *ri 

LH: li EMC: li LMC: li GO: ri KN: ri 

NOM: lê SV: lê SK: li 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only in Nihon shoki, found in 
ten annotational notes, and ten times in poetry: 膽振鉏、此云伊浮梨娑陛 
“ ‘The (Emishi) name Ihurisahe’ is read ipurisapye” (NSG). 

NSK 106 

野麻騰能 yamato no As I say I am about 

飫斯能毘稜栖嗚 osi no pirose wo to cross the wide rapids at Oshi 

倭柁羅務騰 wataramu to in Yamato, 

阿庸比陀豆矩梨 aywopi tadukuri I tie up my foot straps 

擧始豆矩羅符母 kosidukurapu mo and fix my waist band. 

 

釐 


OJ: ri OC: *rə 

LH: liə EMC: ljɨ LMC: liaj GO: ri KN: ri 

NOM: li SV: ly, li SK: li 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS and appears only in Nihon shoki in a 
poem. 

NSK 91 

於彌能姑能 omi no kwo no The son of the Omi has 

耶賦能之魔柯枳 yapu no sibagaki made a fine brushwood fence. 

始陀騰余瀰 sitatoyomi But if the earth quakes 

那爲我與釐據魔 nawi ga yorikoba that brushwood fence 

耶黎夢之魔柯枳 yaremu sibagaki will likely fall to pieces. 

 

慮 


OJ: ro OC: *rah 

LH: liɑh EMC: ljwoh LMC: lyə GO: ro KN: riyo 

NOM: lự SV: lự SK: lye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. In Koryŏgi it says, 其國建九等、其一 
曰吐捽、比一品、舊名大對慮 “Koguryŏ established a nine-rank system (of 
government). The first is called tha-dzuət, which is comparable to the first rank. 
The old name of this rank was ta-tuəs-liah” (Takeuchi 1977:33). 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki in two annotational notes, and 
five poems: 鯯魚、此云擧能之慮 “The name ‘鯯魚’ is read konosiro” (NSG). 

NSK 82 

瀰致儞阿賦耶 miti ni apu ya The youth of Oshiro 

嗚之慮能古 wosiro no kwo engage in battle 

阿母儞擧曾 amo ni koso on their way to war. 

枳擧曳儒阿羅毎 kikoyezu arame Heaven may not hear 

矩儞儞播 kuni nipa about our deeds— 

枳擧曳底那 kikoyete na perhaps those at home will. 

 

里 


OJ: ro OC: *rəʔ 

LH: liəʔ EMC: lɨəʔ GO: ri KN: ri 

NOM: lịa SV: lí, lý SK: li 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It is an important usage, because it 
shows that at an earlier point in time the vowel was unrounded, which fact is only 
preserved in Nom, almost all other Sino-Xenic data showing a high, front vowel. 
While Lurie (2001:399) argues that what scholars call the Suiko-era fragments 
are not as old as most scholars have argued, which I essentially agree with, the 
existence of such old phonograms in many of these should at least make scholars 
think twice about throwing the whole corpus out as later ‘unimportant’ texts. My 
argument is that whatever the dating of the specimen may be, these so-called 
‘Suiko-era fragments’ have relied on data that date from a much earlier period. 

Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu contains the name of a consort of Great King 
Yōmei, Princess Hiroko, 比里古女子 Pirokwo, which name is written 広子 
PIROKWO in Nihon shoki. Also Great King Sushun’s name in Teisetsu is 
written 阿米久尓意斯波留支比里 尓波乃弥己等 Ame Kuni Osiparuki 
Pironipa no Mikoto, but in Shoki it is transcribed in semantograms as 天國排開 
広庭天皇, glossed as ame kuni osiparaki pironipa. 


Vestiges of this tradition carried over into the early Nara era. The Mino 
Census of 702 preserves the following names: 比里 Piro, 比里賣 Piromye, 小 
比 里 賣 WOpiromye, 母 里 賣 Moromye, and 阿止里 Atoro. There are 
vestiges of this usage in Izumo fudoki: 支斯里社 Kisiro Shrine. 

 

呂 


OJ: ro OC: *raʔ 

LH: liɑʔ EMC: ljwoʔ GO: ro KN: riyo 

NOM: lữa SV: lữ, lã SK: lye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It appears twice in the liturgies: 古語云 
志呂志女 須 KOGO NI PU sirosiMYEsu “(Rule) is sirosimyesu in the old 
vernacular…” (NT 8). This phonogram appears on over 3000 mokkan, the 
majority writing the name Maro (麻呂, MK 2178, 末呂, MK 28, and 万呂, MK 
1991, 満呂 MK 10771, 摩呂 unnumbered tablet). 

It is the principal phonogram used in Kojiki: 鹽許袁呂許袁呂迩 SIPO 
koworo koworo ni “salt water made a sound of crackling” (KG), 淤能碁呂嶋 
onogoro sima ‘Onogoro Island’ (KG), 宇士多加禮許呂呂岐弖 uzi takare 
kororokite ‘maggots had gathered and were squirming about’(KG). 

KK 53 

淤志弖流夜 ositeru ya When I came out and stood 

那爾波能佐岐用 nanipa no saki ywo looking at my land from 

伊傳多知弖 idetatite the cape of Naniwa 

和賀久迩美禮婆 wa ga kuni mireba shining brilliantly 

阿波志麻 apa sima I can see even 

淤能碁呂志摩 onogoro sima Awa Island 

阿遲麻佐能 adimasa no and Onogoro Island 

志麻母美由 sima mo miyu and the island with betel palms. 

佐氣都志麻美由 saketusima miyu I also see Sake Island. 

This phonogram is the principal graph in Nihon shoki to transcribe ro. It 
appears in three annotational notes, and 22 times in poetry: 神籬、此云比莽呂 
岐 “ ‘a sacred grove on a mountain set aside for divine protection’ is read 
pimoroki” (NSG). 

NSK 30 

阿布彌能彌 apumi no mi I have lost sight 

齋多能和多利珥 seta no watari ni of the birds that dove here 

伽豆區苔利 kaduku tori at the Seta Ferry 

梅珥志彌曳泥麼 me nisi miyeneba on the sea of Afumi. 

異枳廼倍呂之茂 ikidoporosi mo How irritating that is! 

This is also the principal graph to transcribe ro in Man’yōshū, appearing 265 
times. 

MYS 53 

藤原之 PUDIPARA NO How enviable are 

大宮都加倍 OPOMIYA tukape those maidens who 

安礼衝哉 areTUKU YA were born and raised 

處女之友者 WOTOMYE GA TOMO PA to serve in the great palace 

乏吉呂賀聞 TOMOSIkiro kamo at Fujiwara. 


The cursive form of this phonogram later yields hiragana ろ, while using 
the top part (or perhaps the bottom) of this graph results in katakana ロ. 

 

侶 


OJ: ro OC: *raʔ 

LH: liɑʔ EMC: ljwoʔ GO: ro KN: riyo 

NOM: lứa SV: lư, lô SK: lye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The earliest datable example is the 
representation of Yasumaro’s name in the preface to Kojiki: 太朝臣安万侶 OPO 
OASOMI YASUmaro. Also a wooden tablet from the ruins of the Fujiwara Palace 
(fl. 694–701) contains the name 移部止己麻尓侶 YaBYE Tokomaniro (MK 
148). The tablet is not dated, so it is difficult to know when this was actually 
written. 

The only example of this phonogram in Kojiki is in the name of the compiler, 
Yasumaro. This phonogram is not used in the annotational notes or poetry of 
Nihon shoki, but it does appear in names like 中臣宮地連烏摩侶 NAKATOMI 
MIYADOKORO MURAZI Womaro (NSG), 境 部 臣 雄 摩侶 SAKAPIBYE OMI 
WOmaro (NSG), 阿倍臣摩侶 Ape OMI Maro (NSG), 阿倍倉梯萬侶 Ape 
KURAPASI Maro (NSG), and 蘇我石川萬侶 Swoga ISIKAPA Maro (NSG). 

This phonogram appears in Man’yōshū, but only in seven poems. 

MYS 487 

淡海路乃 APUMIDI no The Isaya ‘how I wonder’ River 

鳥篭之山有 TOKO NO YAMA NARU that runs through Mount Toko 

不知哉川 ISAYAGAPA in Afumiji: like that name 

氣乃己呂其侶波 ke no korogoro pa I suppose I will continue 

戀乍裳将有 KWOPWITUTU MO ARAMU to yearn for a while. 

 

閭 


OJ: ro OC: *ra 

LH: lia EMC: ljwo KN: lyə GO: ro KN: riyo 

NOM: lơ, lừ SV: lư SK: lye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only in Nihon shoki, in one 
example, the name 更名、於閭礙 “He was also known as Oroge ‘the fool’ ” 
(NSG). 

 

勒 


OJ: ro OC: *rə̂ k 

LH: lək EMC: lək GO: roku KN: roku 

NOM: lắc, lấc SV: lặc SK: luk 

Usage / History: 

This usage belongs to the LJS and appears in Nihon shoki in the name 徳勒 
津宮 tokoroTU [NO] MIYA ‘the Tokorotsu Palace’ (NSG). 

 

廬 


OJ: ro OC: *ra 

LH: liɑ EMC: ljwo LMC: liə GO: ro KN: riyo 

NOM: lư SV: lư, lô SK: lye 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This phonogram is used in one 
annotational note and appears in two poems: 嘖讓、此云擧廬毘 “ ‘scold’ is 
read koropi” (NSG). 

NSK 120 

瀰儺度能 minatwo no Sailing down the river 

于之裒能矩娜利 usipo no kudari to the harbor, 

于那倶娜梨 una kudari riding out to sea my mind 

于之廬母倶例尼 usiro mo kure ni darkens even with the past— 

飫岐底舸庾舸武 okite ka yukamu must I leave you and sail on? 

 

稜 


OJ: ro OC: *rəŋ 

LH: lɨŋ EMC: ljəŋ LMC liəŋ GO: rou KN: riyou 

NOM: NA SV: lăng SK: lung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears only in Nihon shoki in one 
poem. 

NSK 106 

野麻騰能 yamato no As I say I am about 

飫斯能毘􀀀栖嗚 osi no pirose se wo to cross the wide rapids of Oshi 

倭柁羅務騰 wataramu to at Yamato, 

阿庸比陀豆矩梨 aywopi tadukuri I tie up my leg-straps 

擧始豆矩羅符母 kosidukurapu mo and even fix my waist band. 

 

綾 


OJ: rogi OC: *rəŋ 

LH: lɨŋ EMC: ljəŋ GO: rou KN: riyou 

NOM: trăng SV: lăng SK: lung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in a document in the 
Shōsōin in the following toponym: 餘綾郡 Yorogi District. This same toponym 
appears in MYS 3372 as 余呂伎 Yorogi. 

 

流 


OJ: ru OC: *ru or *riu 

LH: liu EMC: ljəu GO: ru KN: riu 

NOM: lưu SV: lưu SK: lywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Kwangkaytho stele in 
the name 于流城 *u-ru fortress. This also appears in Paekche material quoted 
in Nihon shoki: 彌州流 Mituru, a personal name, 意流村 Oru Village, 州流 
須祇 Turu Suki (Village), and 枕流王 Prince Tomuru. 

This phonogram also appears once in the Mino Census of 702 in the name 
久酢流賣 Kusuremye. This phonogram appears 17 times in the liturgies: 久度 
古関二所能宮爾弖供奉来流皇御神 kudwo PURUAKI PUTA TOKORO no MIYA 
nite TUKAPE KITAREru SUME MIKAMWI ‘the august imperial deities who have 
come to be worshipped at the two shrines of Kudo and Furuaki….’ (NT 6). This 
phonogram also appears on a few mokkan: 要流加佐志万呂 Yerukasasimaro 
(unnumbered tablet), 比流多利 pirutari ‘?’ (unnumbered tablet), and the 


fragment of a poem: 波流奈礼波伊万志□□□…由米余伊母波夜久伊□□奴 
□止利阿波志□ paru nareba imasi XXX…yume yo i mo payaku iXXnuX tori 
apasiX… ‘Because it is spring / right now… / never even (think of sleep) / 
quickly… / you harmonized with me’ (MK 179). 

This phonogram is the principal graph used to transcribe ru in Kojiki: 淤母 
陀流神 the deity Omodaru (KG), 哭伊佐知流 NAKI-isatiru ‘to weep violently’ 
(KG), and 御須麻流之玉 MIsumaru NO TAMA ‘the august jewels that wrap 
around (to form a bracelet)’ (KG). 

KK 5 

奴婆多麻能 nubatama no I put on black robes, 

久路岐美祁斯遠 kurwoki mikyesi wo black as ink, 

麻都夫佐爾 matubusa ni completely covering 

登理與曾比 toriyosopi myself in them. 

淤岐都登理 okitu tori When I look down at myself, 

牟那美流登岐 munamiru toki fluttering my sleeves 

波多多藝母 patatagi mo like the birds in the offing, 

許禮婆布佐波受 kore pa pusapazu this outfit does not suit me. 

幣都那美 pyetunami I pull the robes off my back 

曾迩奴岐宇弖 so ni nukiute like the waves that come ashore. 

蘇迩杼理能 swonidori no I put on blue robes, 

阿遠岐美祁斯遠 awoki mikyesi wo blue like the kingfisher, 

麻都夫佐迩 matubusa ni completely covering 

登理與曾比 toriyosopi myself in them. 

於岐都登理 okitu tori When I look down at myself, 

牟那美流登岐 munamiru toki fluttering my sleeves 

波多多藝母 patatagi mo like the birds in the offing, 

許母布佐波受 ko mo pusapazu this outfit also does not suit me. 

幣都那美 pyenami I pull the robes off my back 

曾迩奴棄宇弖 so ni nukiute like the waves that come ashore. 

夜麻賀多爾 yamagata ni I put on indigo blue robes, 

麻岐斯 makisi made with fabric 

阿多多尼都岐 atatane tuki dyed in the liquid of 

曾米紀賀斯流迩 somekwi ga siru ni plants grown from foreign seeds 

斯米許呂母遠 sime koromo wo that had been pounded, 

麻都夫佐迩 matubusa ni completely covering 

登理與曾比 toriyosopi myself in them. 

淤岐都登理 okitu tori When I look down at myself 

牟那美流登岐 munamiru toki fluttering my sleeves 

波多多藝母 patatagi mo like the birds in the offing 

許斯與呂志 ko si yorosi this one looks good on me. 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, found 15 times in the poetry. 

NSK 25 

珥比麼利 nipibari How many nights have 

菟玖波塢須擬氐 tukupa wo sugwite we spent since passing through 

異玖用伽禰菟流 ikuywo ka neturu Niibari and Tsukuba? 

This is the principal phonogram used to transcribe ru in Man’yōshū, 
appearing in the anthology a total of 939 times. 


MYS 815 

武都紀多知 mutukwi tati When the new year’s moon rises 

波流能吉多良婆 paru no kitaraba and spring has arrived, 

可久斯許曽 kakusi koso we will enjoy ourselves, 

烏梅乎乎岐都々 ume wo wokitutu inviting the plum to bloom 

多努之岐乎倍米 tanwosiki wopeme as we do right now. 

 

留 


OJ: ru OC: *ru 

LH: liu EMC: ljəu GO: ru KN: riu 

NOM: lưu SV: lưu SK: lywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to PBS. It appears on the Kwangkaytho stele in a 
variant form 畱 in the names 世子儒留王 Prince Noru, the heir, and 朱留王 
King Suru. 

It also appears in Paekche material quoted in Nihon shoki: 都都岐留 Mount 
Tutukiru, and 疏留城 Soru Fortress. 

This phonogram also appears in the earliest extant corpus of Japan in the 
Jōgūki fragment in the name 久留比彌 Kuru Pimye. It also appears on the 
Hōryūji Tenjukoku mandala tapestry in transcribing the name of Great King 
Kinmei: 阿米久爾意斯波留支比里爾波乃彌己等 Ame Kuniosi Paruki 
Pironipa no Mikoto. This phonogram appears 40 times in the liturgies: 高成弖拠 
留宇豆幣帛乎 TAKANASIte TATEMATUru udu [NO] MITEGURA wo “…the exalted 
offerings we present are piled high… (NT 15). It also appears on a variety of 
mokkan: □本佐留 XMOTO Saru (MK 2820), 弥留廿斤 ‘20 PAKARI of miru,’ 
or about 26 pounds of young seaweed (MK 1209). 

This phonogram is used in Kojiki, but is used almost one-tenth as often as 
流: 此訓疎云奢加留 “This graph 疎 ‘grow distant’ is to be read zakaru” (KG), 
訓鳴云那留 “The graph 鳴 ‘cry’ is to be read naru.” 然留 SIKAru ‘however’ 
(KG). 

KK 9 

宇陀能 uda no In the high 

多加紀爾 takakwi ni fort of Uda 

志藝和那波留 sigi wana paru a trap for snipe I set, 

和賀麻都夜 wa ga matu ya and as I waited— 

志藝波佐夜良受 sigi pa sayarazu it did not catch a snipe. 

This phonogram is used somewhat rarely in Nihon shoki, appearing only 
three times in annotational notes, and five times in poetry: 轠然、此云乎謀苦 
留留爾 “ ‘the string turns and turns’ is read wo mo kururu ni” (NSG). 

NSK 67 

波那具波辭 panagupasi What beauty and detail 

佐區羅能梅涅 sakura no mede these cherry blossoms have. 

許等梅涅麼 kotomedeba If beauty is the same 

波椰區波梅涅孺 payaku pa medezu then I should have loved sooner: 

和我梅豆留古羅 wa ga meduru kwora my beloved little maidens. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū a total of 112 times. 


MYS 97 

三薦苅 MIKOMO KARU Without even pulling back 

信濃乃真弓 sinanwo no MAYUMI the string of the Shinano true bow— 

不引為而 PIKAZU SITE cutting the rushes of Shinano, 

弦佐留行事乎 WO PAKUru WAZA wo you cannot say that. 

知跡言莫君二 SIRU TO IPANAku ni You know how to string the bow! 

 

琉 


OJ: ru OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: luw GO: ru KN: riu 

NOM: lưu SV: lưu SK: lywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It appears in a mid-Nara document in 
the name 久琉理 Kururi. It also appears five times in Kojiki: 久羅下那洲多陀 
用幣琉之時 kuragye nasu tadaywopyeru NO TOKI ‘when (the land) floated back 
and forth on the water like a jellyfish...’ (KG), 荒夫琉神 ARAburu KAMWI 
‘violent deities’ (KG), and 大倭根子日子國玖琉命 OPO YAMATO NEKWO 
PIKWO KUNIkuru [NO] MIKOTO (KG). It also appears twice in Shoku Nihongi, 
both in the same word 琉璃 ruri ‘emerald,’ a transcription of Sanskrit vaiḍūrya, 
‘lapis lazuli’ (754.11.8). 

 

瑠 


OJ: ru OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: luw GO: ru KN: riu 

NOM: lưu SV: lưu SK: lywu 

Usage / History: 

This is a variant graph of 琉 (see above). 

 

屢 


OJ: ru OC: *roh 

LH: lioh EMC: ljuh LMC: lyə GO: ru KN: ru 

NOM: lú, lũ SV: lũ SK: lwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This is the principal graph to transcribe 
ru in Nihon shoki. It appears in 12 annotational notes, and 38 times in the poetry: 
大日孁貴、此云於保比屢咩能武智 “ ‘Ōhirume no muchi (variant name of the 
Sun Goddess)’ is read opopirumye no muti” (NSG). 

NSK 2 

阿妹奈屨夜 ame naru ya In the heavens 

乙登多奈婆多廼 woto tanabata no the jewels strung upon 

汙奈餓勢屨 unagaseru the string hung around 

多磨廼彌素磨屨廼 tama no misumaru no the neck of the Weaver Maiden 

阿奈陀磨波夜 anatama pa ya are very beautiful— 

彌多爾 mitani like the beauty of him who 

輔柁和柁羅須 puta watarasu shines over two hills, 

阿泥素企多伽避顧禰 adisukitakapikwone Ajisuki Taka Hikone. 

 

漏 


OJ: ru OC: *rôh 

LH: loh EMC: ləuh LMC: ləw GO: ru KN: rou 

NOM: lạu, làu, lậu SV: lâu SK: lwu 


Usage / History: 

If this usage actually exists, it belongs to the LJS. However, there is an 
interesting problem. This phonogram only appears once in Nihon shoki (cf. Mori 
1991:227), supposedly in poem NSK 22. However, a careful look at the 
manuscripts show that other than the Kitano and Atsuta manuscripts, which have 
漏 in the final stanza of this poem, all other manuscripts have 屢. Other than 
making this fact known, I say no more regarding this phonogram to transcribe ru. 

 

樓 


OJ: ru OC: *rô 

LH: lo EMC: ləu LMC: lyə GO: rou KN: ru 

NOM: lầu, lâu SV: lâu SK: lwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in Nihon shoki in one 
annotational note, and five times in just two poems: 癡騃鉤、此云干樓該膩 
“ ‘hook of stupidity’ is read urukedi” (NSG). 

NSK 99 

柯羅屨儞嗚 kara kuni wo No matter what people 

以柯儞輔居等所 ika ni pu koto so may say about our land of Kara, 

梅豆羅古枳駄樓 medurakwo kitaru Mezurako has arrived. 

武哿左屨樓 mukasakuru Passing through the distant 

以祇能和駄唎嗚 iki no watari wo channel of Iki 

梅豆羅古枳駄樓 medurakwo kitaru Mezurako has at last arrived. 

 

婁 


OJ: ru OC: *roʔ or *rô 

LH: lioʔ, lo EMC: lju, ləu LMC: lyə GO: rou KN: ru 

NOM: lâu SV: lâu SK: lwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in one annotational note in 
Nihon shoki: 植、此云多底婁 “ ‘grow’ is read tateru” (NSG). 

 

蘆 


OJ: ru OC: *ra 

LH: lia EMC: ljwo LMC luə GO: ro KN: ru 

NOM: lau, lứ SV: lô SK: lye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in Nihon shoki, used eight 
times in the poetry. 

NSK 34 

知麼能 tiba no Looking out over 

伽豆怒塢彌例麼 kadunwo wo mireba the verdant plain of Kazu, 

茂々智儾蘆 momotidaru I behold before me 

夜珥波母彌喩 yanipa mo miyu an abundance of villages— 

區珥能朋母彌喩 kuni no po mo miyu I also see a land of excellence. 

 

盧 


OJ: ru OC: *râ 

LH: la > lɔ EMC: luo LMC luə GO: ro KN: ru 

NOM: lu, lo SV: lô SK: lwo 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in Nihon shoki, in two 
annotational notes, and one poem: 訛、此云興許奈磨盧 “ ‘corruption’ is read 
yokonamaru” (NSG). 

NSK 1 

夜句茂多兔 yakumo tatu Endowed with power, 

伊弩毛夜覇餓岐 idumwo yapyegaki this two-fold Izumo fence— 

兔磨語昧爾 tuma gome ni to conceal ourselves, 

夜覇餓枳都倶盧 yapyegaki tukuru I have built this two-fold fence. 

贈廼夜覇餓岐廻 sono yapyegaki we Yes, within this two-fold fence! 

 

類 


OJ: ru OC: *rus 

LH: luis EMC: ljwih LMC: luaj GO: rui KN: rui 

NOM: loại, loài SV: loại SK: lywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears only in Man’yōshū, but 
where it is used quite extensively, appearing in Books 7–13 a total of 45 times. 
As Ōno (1977:711) points out over 70% of the usages appear in a transcription of 
the suffix kyeru. 

MYS 1071 

山末尓 YAMA NO PA ni While waiting for the moon— 

不知夜歴月乎 ISAYWOPU TUKWI wo which is hesitating to appear 

将出香登 IDEMU KA to over the edge of the ridge, 

待乍居尓 MATITUTU WORU ni waiting for it to appear any moment, 

夜曽降家類 YWO so PUKYENIkyeru the night has only deepened. 

 

路 


OJ: rwo OC: *râkh 

LH: lah > lɔh EMC: luoh GO: ro KN: ro 

NOM: trò, lần SV: lộ SK: lwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in toponyms such as 冉路國 
*nam-lɔh domain, 弁辰半路 國 *phuɑn-dźɨn-pɑn-lɔh ‘Pɑn-lɔh Domain of 
Phuɑn-dźɨn,’ 弁辰甘路國 *phuɑn-dźɨn- kɑm-lɔh ‘Kɑm-lɔh Domain of Phuɑndźɨn,’ 
and 戸路國 *ɡɔ-lɔh domain. 

This phonogram also appears in Kojiki, used to transcribe two colors: 久路 
kurwo ‘black’ and 斯路 sirwo ‘white.’ 

KK 4 

阿遠夜麻迩 awo yama ni If the sun hides behind 

比賀迦久良婆 pi ga kakuraba the green mountains 

奴婆多麻能 nubatama no then come visit me at night, 

用波伊伝那牟 ywo pa idenamu black as ink. 

阿佐比能 asapi no And with the morning sun 

惠美佐加延岐弖 wemi sakayekite with a bright smile 

多久豆怒能 takudunwo no with your white arms, 

斯路岐多陀牟岐 sirwoki tadamuki white like mulberry, 

阿和由岐能 awayuki no you will wrap them around 


和加夜流牟泥遠 wakayaru mune wo my young breast, soft as fresh snow, 

曾陀多岐 sodataki and gently caress me…. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, and is the principal graph to 
transcribe rwo, appearing only 32 times throughout the anthology. 

MYS 3412 

賀美都家野 kamitukyeNWO Like the kuzu vine 

久路保乃祢呂乃 kurwopo no nero no that grows on the Kuropo Peak 

久受葉我多 kuzuPAgata in Kamitsukeno, 

可奈師家兒良尓 kanasikye KWOra ni my poor child 

伊夜射可里久母 iyazakariku mo will be coming from afar. 

 

盧 


OJ: rwo OC: *râ 

LH: la > lɔ EMC: luo GO: ro KN: ru 

NOM: lu, lo SV: lô SK: lwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in toponyms such as 弁辰瀆 
盧國 *phuɑn-dźɨn dok-lɔ ‘Dok-lɔ Domain of Phuɑn-dźɨn,’ 斯盧國 *si-lɔ (or an 
earlier *si-lɑ?) domain, 末盧國 *mat-lɔ domain. 

This phonogram also appears on the Kwangkaytho stele: 臼模盧城 *ɡu-mɔlɔ 
fortress, 若模盧城 *niak-mɔ-lɔ fortress, and 牟盧城 *mu-lɔ fortress. This 
usage also appears in Paekche material quoted in Nihon shoki: 蓋盧邑 
Kapurwo Village. 

This phonogram appears once in Kojiki. 

KK 11 

意佐賀能 osaka no In the great cavern 

意富牟盧夜爾 opomurwoya ni at Osaka 

比登佐波爾 pito sapa ni many men 

岐伊理袁理 ki iriwori have come and entered. 

There is also one example of this phonogram each in the annotational notes 
and poetry of Shoki: 飄掌、此云陀毘盧箇須 “ ‘raise one’s hands and shake 
them’ is read tapirwokasu” (NSG). 

NSK 81 

農播頴磨能 nupatama no If they had saddled that 

柯彼能矩盧古磨 kapwi no kwurwo kwoma dark horse from Kahi, 

矩羅枳制播 kura kiseba black as ink, 

伊能致志儺磨志 inoti sinamasi he would have lost his life. 

柯彼能倶盧古磨 kapwi no kurwo kwoma Alas, thanks to that dark horse. 

 

鹵 


OJ: rwo OC: *râʔ 

LH: lɑʔ > lɔʔ EMC: luoʔ GO: ru KN: ro 

NOM: lỗ SV: lỗ SK: lwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Eta Funayama tumulus 
sword (ca. 500) inscription in a name, the inscription of which is heavily 
damaged: 獲□□□鹵大王 ‘Great King Wak-X-X-X-rwo. Fortunately we have 
the Inariyama tumulus sword (ca. 500) inscription that carries the same name of 


the king, but with less damage on the inscription: 獲加多支鹵大王 Great King 
Waka Takyerwo. 

Some have speculated that this orthographic usage came from Paekche (cf. 
Murayama and Miller 1979:416, Bentley 2001), and recent excavations in South 
Korea confirm this. Inukai (2014:130–131) introduces a wooden tablet excavated 
from the Sam’i Temple ruins near the tombs of the Paekche kings. On that tablet 
is the designation 漢城下部對徳疏加鹵, a name: *Sio-ka-luo, 11th rank, lower 
section of the capital. Inukai notes that 鹵 is written in an abbreviated form, 
with 夕 inside the box instead of ※, a form also found on both the Eta 
Funayama and Inariyama tumulus sword inscriptions. 

This phonogram also appears in Paekche material quoted in Nihon shoki: 蓋 
鹵王立 ‘Kapurwo was made king.’ There are also peninsular names like 麻鹵 
Marwo and 阿鹵旱岐 Arwo Kanki. This phonogram appears in a name in 
Shoku Nihongi, 羿鹵 Keirwo (788.9.6). 

 

魯 


OJ: rwo OC: *râʔ 

LH: lɑʔ > lɔʔ EMC: luoʔ GO: ru KN: ro 

NOM: lỗ, lõ, sỗ SV: lỗ SK: lwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS, and appears in quotes of Paekche 
material found in Nihon shoki: 左魯 Sarwo and 佐魯麻都 Sarwo Matwo. This 
phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, twice in the poetry. 

NSK 109 

波魯波魯儞 parwo parwo ni Far off in the distance 

渠騰曾枳擧喩屢 koto so kikoyuru you can hear someone speaking 

之麻能野父播羅 sima no yabupara in the thicket on the island plain. 

 

婁 


OJ: rwo OC: *roʔ or *rô 

LH: lioʔ, lo EMC: lju, ləu GO: ro KN: rou 

NOM: lâu SV: lâu SK: lwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This phonogram appears on the 
Kwangkaytho stele (ca. 414) in names like 婁売城 *lo-mɛh fortress, 燕婁城 
*ʔen-lo fortress, 古牟婁城 *kɔ-mu-lo fortress, and 味仇婁鴨廬 *muh-gu-loʔɑɨp-
lɔ (District). It also appears in the Paekche material quoted in Nihon shoki in 
two personal names: 己州己婁 Kotu Korwo and 沙宅己婁 Satak Korwo. This 
phonogram appears on several mokkan: 紀伊国牟婁郡牟婁 Kii Province 
Murwo District Murwo… (MK 435), 牟婁大夫 Minister Murwo (MK 160). 

This usage, though rare, appears in the native sections of Nihon shoki, in the 
name 牟婁 Murwo in the record of Saimei. This same representation for the 
name of Murwo appears also in Shoku Nihongi (765.10.22). 

 

漏 


OJ: rwo OC: *rôh 

LH: loh EMC: ləuh GO: ro KN: rou 

NOM: lạu, làu, lậu SV: lâu SK: lwu 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. This phonogram appears 21 times in the 
liturgies, mainly in the names of the two procreative deities: 高天原爾神留坐皇 
睦 神 漏 伎 命 神 漏 彌 命 TAKAMAPARA ni KAMUDUMARIMASU SUME MUTU 
KAMUrwoki [NO] MIKOTO KAMUrwomi [NO] MIKOTO “The divine, imperial male 
procreative deity and the divine, imperial female procreative deity who 
augustly dwell in the high plain of heaven…” (NT 7). This graph appears a 
number of times on mokkan: 紀伊国无漏郡 Kii Province Murwo District (MK 
2285), 阿漏□ arwoX ‘master?’ (MKK 20:16). 

It appears in Kojiki only 12 times: 其麻都漏波奴人 SONO maturwopanu 
PITO ‘those people who would not submit (to the rule of the court)...’ (KG), 訶具 
漏比賣 Kagurwo Pimye (KG). 

KK 52 

淤岐幣迩波 okipye ni pa There are boats 

袁夫泥都羅羅玖 wobune turaraku lined up out in the offing. 

久漏邪夜能 kurwozaya no Black like a sheath 

摩佐豆古和藝毛 masadukwo wagimwo my beautiful beloved, 

玖迩幣玖陀良須 kunipye kudarasu she heads for her home. 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, twice in one poem: 

NSK 58 

菟藝泥赴 tuginepu This woman of 

夜莽之呂謎能 yamasiromye no Yamashiro, thick with trees, 

許玖波茂知 kokupa moti dug up a large radish 

于智辭於朋泥 utisi opone with a wooden hoe. 

泥士漏能 nezirwo no Those arms of hers, 

辭漏多娜武枳 sirwotadamuki white like the large radish— 

摩箇儒鷄麼虚曾 makazukyeba koso you could say you knew me not 

辭羅儒等茂伊波梅 sirazu tomo ipame if we had never lay intertwined. 

This phonogram appears in Man’yōshū, but only seven times. 

MYS 1798 

古家丹 INISIPYE NI When I gaze out at 

妹等吾見 IMWO to WA GA MISI Kuro-ushi Beach, 

黒玉之 NUBATAMA NO black as ink, 

久漏牛方乎 kurwo USIGATA wo that my beloved and I saw together 

見佐府下 MIREBA sabuSIMO I feel so lonely. 

 

樓 


OJ: rwo OC: *rô 

LH: lo EMC: ləu LMC: lyə GO: ro KN: ru 

NOM: lầu, lâu SV: lâu SK: lwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It appears in Kojiki, only once in the 
verb 摩都樓波奴 maturwopanu ‘someone who will not submit’ (KG). 

This phonogram also appears once in Nihon shoki, in one poem: 

NSK 119 

耶麻古曳底 yama kwoyete Though I cross over mountains 

于瀰倭柁留騰母 umi wataru tomo and traverse the ocean, 

於母之樓枳 omosirwoki can I ever forget 


伊麻紀能禹知播 imakwi no uti pa the pleasant land 

倭須羅庾麻旨珥 wasurayumasizi that is Imaki? 

 

露 


OJ: rwo OC: *râkh 

LH: lah > lɔh EMC: luoh GO: ro KN: ro 

NOM: lộ, lồ, rò SV: lộ SK: lwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears once in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 9 

於佐箇廼 osaka no Though there are many 

於朋務露夜珥 opomurwoya ni who have come and entered 

比苔瑳破而 pito sapa ni the great cavern of Osaka, 

異離烏利苔毛 iriwori tomo and though many men 

比苔瑳破而 pito sapa ni have entered here 

枳伊離烏利苔毛 ki iriwori tomo and are seated before us, 

瀰都瀰都志 mitumitusi you, the intrepid 

倶梅能固邏餓 kume no kwora ga sons of the Kume, 

勾鶩都々伊 kubututui with pommel-head hilts, 

異志都々伊毛智 isitutui moti holding your stone-head swords, 

于智弖之夜莽務 utitesi yamamu will now smite the enemy. 

 

六 


OJ: rwoku OC: *ruk 

LH: liuk EMC: ljuk GO: roku KN: riku 

NOM: lục SV: lục SK: lwuk 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears just from the Sino-Xenic 
evidence that perhaps the nuclear vowel lowered in Go-on, but a look at Nom 
shows evidence of -o-: 𠯿 lóc, 𡉽 lóc. The sole example of this phonogram 
appears in a document preserved in the Shōsōin: 六呂 rwokuro ‘lathe.’ 

 

 


S 

 

 

沙 



OJ: sa OC: *srâi 

LH: s̘ai EMC: s̘ a GO: sa, sia KN: sa 

NOM: sa, sà SV: sa SK: sa 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This graph appears on the 
Kwangkaytho stele, in the following place names: 彌沙城 *mie-sai fortress, 沙 
水城 *sai-tsui fortress, and 沙溝城 *sai-ko fortress. 

The oldest surviving example of 沙 found in Japan appears on the 
Inariyama tumulus sword, in the name 其児名多沙鬼獲居 “His child’s name 
[being] Tasakwi Wakka.” 

This phonogram also appears in the Korean records quoted in Nihon shoki: 
沙至比跪 satipikwo (or maybe satipiku?). This appears to be a version of 
(Kaduraki) Sotupiko. Another example is the name of a Paekche official, 上佐平 
沙己婁 Sakorwo of the Upper First rank. 

This phonogram 沙 also appears in the inscription found on the base of the 
Buddhist statue at Gangōji, in the names 阿沙都麻 Asatuma and 未沙乃 
Mwisano (Ōno 1977:23). This phonogram is found on a number of mokkan, but 
mainly in inscriptions related to Buddhism: 沙弥麻呂 Sami Maro ‘Maro the 
Novice Priest’ (unnumbered tablet), 安 房 国 安 房 郡 廣 湍 郷沙田 里 Apa 
Province Apa District PIROSE Village SaDA Hamlet (unnumbered tablet), and 
□沙賀我太雲朗□具不祢乃都久 X saka ga PUTO UMURAU X(ko)gu pune no 
tuku… (MKK 17:52), which I tentatively interpret as ‘the boat rowed by the 
Great Umurau of Xsaka arrives at….’ 

This phonogram is also found 29 times in Kojiki, though it was not used in 
the poetry. Several examples include 姓日下謂玖沙訶 “The family name 日下 
is read kusaka” (KG), 次妹若沙那賣神 “The younger sister deity (is) WAKA 
sanamye” (KG). 

This phonogram is also used sparingly in Nihon shoki, appearing once in the 
annotational notes, and once in the poetry: 顧眄之間、此云美屢摩沙可梨爾 
“ ‘To look back’ is read miru masakari ni” (NSG). It also appears in toponyms 
like 沙麼之浦 sama NO URA ‘the bay of Sama,’ and 訶沙郡 Kasa District. 

NSK 33 

許能彌企能 kono miki no It is strange 

阿椰珥 aya ni how very 

于多娜濃芝 utadanwosi delightful this wine is. 

作沙 sa sa Drink! Drink! 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū. There appears to be some 
textual confusion between 沙 and 紗, but Ōno (1977:405) concludes that while 
most of these examples should have 沙 as the archetype, there are a couple of 
examples where 紗 appears to be original (see that entry below). 


MYS 757 

遠有者 TOPOKU AREBA If you were far away 

和備而毛有乎 wabwiTE mo ARU wo I could endure loneliness, 

里近 SATWO TIKAKU but it leaves me feeling anxious 

有常聞乍 ARI TO KIKITUTU when I hear you are in 

不見之為便奈沙 MINU GA SUBE nasa a close village and I do not see you. 

 

佐 


OJ: sa OC: *tsâih 

LH: tsɑiʔ EMC: tsâʔ GO: sa KN: sa 

NOM: tá SV: tá SK: ca 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram also belongs to the PBS. The earliest known usage is in 
Shoki, in the quotes from the peninsular source records. A sample usage appears 
in the Mimana name 佐魯麻都 with the interlinear reading of sarwomatu. 
Another example is the Paekche first rank, written 佐平 sape (or sapeŋ). 

This phonogram also appears in the Suiko era corpus, in the Buddhist 
inscription on the base of the Buddhist statue in the Gangōji temple, and in three 
names in the genealogy in Jōgūki. Those three names are 佐久羅韋 Sakurawi, 
佐富女王 Princess Sapo, and 佐富王 Prince Sapo (Ōno 1977:23). This 
phonogram appears in a number of liturgies: 磐根木根履佐久彌弖 IPANE KINE 
PUMIsakumite “the couriers will stamp through the rocks and the roots of 
trees…” (NT 1). This appears frequently on mokkan: 播磨国佐用郡 Parima 
Province Saywo District (MK 2080), 阿治麻佐女 AdimasaMYE (MK 2348), 
丹波国加佐郡 Tanipa Province Kasa District (MK 451). 

佐 is the main phonogram used in Kojiki: 佐度嶋 Sadwo Island (KG), 奧 
津那藝佐毘古神 the deity OKITU Nagisabikwo (KG), 建速須佐之男命 
TAKYE PAYA Susa NO WO (KG). According to Ōno (1977:174) there are 118 
examples of 佐 in the poetry of Kojiki. Below is an example from one poem: 

KK 68 

比婆理波 pibari pa The skylark 

阿米迩迦氣流 ame ni kakeru flies up high, 

多迦由玖夜 taka yuku ya across the heavens. 

波夜夫佐和氣 payabusa wake Prince Hayabusa Wake! 

佐邪岐登良佐泥 sazaki torasane Capture the wren! 

This phonogram is also quite popular in Nihon shoki, appearing 19 times in 
the annotational notes, and 59 times in poetry: 天吉葛、此云阿摩能與佐圖羅 
“ ‘Heavenly auspicious vine’ is read ama no yosatura” (NSG), 泉津平坂、此云 
余母都比羅佐可 “ ‘The flat plain of Yomi’ is read yomotu pira saka” (NSG). 

NSK 15 

許能瀰枳破 kono miki pa This divine sake 

和餓瀰枳那羅孺 wa ga miki narazu is not for myself. 

椰磨等那殊 yamato nasu It was prepared by 

於朋望能農之能 opomononusi no the builder of Yamato, 

介瀰之瀰枳 kamisi miki Ōmononushi. 

伊句臂佐 ikupisa Prosper forever, 

伊句臂佐 ikupisa forever. 


This phonogram is quite prominent in Man’ yōshū. According to Ōno 
(1977:402), the phonogram 左 “is used much more frequently than 佐,” but the 
numbers do not bear this out. I have counted 626 examples of 佐, but only 383 
examples of 左 in the anthology. Perhaps Ōno has 左 and 佐 reversed. 

MYS 3581 

秋佐良婆 AKI saraba When autumn comes 

安比見牟毛能乎 apiMImu mono wo we will see each other again; 

奈尓之可母 nani sika mo so why is it 

奇里尓多都倍久 kwiri ni tatubeku that you lament so much 

奈氣伎之麻佐牟 nagekisimasamu that a mist arises? 

 

左 


OJ: sa OC: *tsâiʔ 

LH: tsaiʔ EMC: tsâʔ GO: sa KN: sa 

NOM: tả SV: tả, tá SK: ca 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram also belongs to the PBS. The oldest known example of this 
phonogram appears in the peninsular records quoted in Nihon shoki: 左魯 
glossed as saru, but the EMC reading of tsâʔ lɔ suggests that it likely was closer 
to sarwo. This may show that the Korean orthographies had no vowel 
corresponding to a back, low round vowel, and shifted the sound to the next 
closest vowel, which was a back, high, round vowel. Another example is the 
spelling of the first rank in Paekche: 下左平木尹貴 Moku Unkwi of the lower 
first rank (first rank being sape or sapeŋ). Likely Paekche avoided this graph as a 
phonogram, because of its semantic importance, ‘left’ being superior over ‘right’ 
in Chinese culture. 

This phonogram appears in the liturgies, but it is confined to the following 
phrase, where it appears five times in the liturgies: 皇神等能依左志奉牟奥津御 
年乎 SUMEGAMWITATI no YOsasi MATURAmu OKITU MITOSI wo “The final harvest 
of grain ordered to be presented to the imperial deities…” (NT 1). 

There is only one example of this phonogram 左 in Kojiki: 土左国 the 
land of Twosa (KG). 

There are eight examples of 左 in the annotational notes, and five examples 
in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 正勝、此云麻娑柯。一云麻左柯豆 “ ‘Surely I 
have won’ is read masaka. Another record has masa katu” (NSG). 

NSK 114 

模騰渠等爾 motogoto ni Though blossoms are blooming 

婆那播左該騰模 pana pa sakyedomo at the trunk of every tree, 

那爾騰柯母 nani to kamo why is it that my lovely 

于都倶之伊母我 utukusi imo ga beloved has not come 

磨陀左枳涅渠農 mata sakidekonu and bloomed again? 

As noted under 佐, the phonogram 左 is the second most used graph to 
transcribe sa in Man’yōshū. Simple examples are 久左麻久羅 kusamakura ‘a 
pillow made of grass’ (MYS 3612, 3637, 3674, 3719, 4263), 比左 pisa ‘long’ 
(MYS 3600, 3604, 3650, 3667), 左枝 saki ‘tip’ (MYS 1937), 左倍 sape ‘only’ 
(MYS 198, 723, 745, 770, 781), 左礼婆 sareba ‘when it comes’ (MYS 3625, 
3627, 3629, 3699), 左夜 saYWO ‘night’ (MYS 274, 1732, 1937, 2820, 2906, 
3220, 3310), and 左小壮鹿 saWOSIKA ‘buck’ (MYS 2220, 2267, 2268, 2277). 


差 


OJ: sa OC: *tshrâi 

LH: tshai EMC: tsha GO: sa, sia, sai KN: sa 

NOM: sai, sây SV: sa, sai, si, soa SK: cha, chi, chay, choy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Inariyama sword 
inscription, in the name 加差披余 *ka-sa-pai-ya. The readings preserved in 
Hokekyō ongi attest to the mixed nature of Go-on. This phonogram has three 
consistent readings in the various manuscripts: sa, sia, and sai (1995.2:528–536). 

This phonogram is not used in any other extant record, aside from Nihon 
shoki, where it is used once in the poetry. 

NSK 103 

摩蘇餓豫 swoga yo Truly you are the Soga, 

蘇餓能古羅破 swoga no kwora pa the posterity of the Soga— 

宇摩奈羅麼 uma naraba If you were horses, 

譬武伽能古摩 pimuka no kwoma steeds of Hyūga you would be. 

多智奈羅麼 tati naraba If you were swords, 

勾禮能摩差比 kure no masapi fine blades of Koryŏ you would be. 

宇倍之訶茂 ubesika mo How true this is. 

蘇餓能古羅烏 swoga no kwora wo That must be why 

於朋枳瀰能 opokimi no the posterity of the Soga 

菟伽破須羅志枳 tukapasurasiki serve the great lord. 

 

娑 


OJ: sa OC: *sâi 

LH: sai EMC: sâ GO: sa KN: sia 

NOM: sa SV: ta, tả, toa SK: sa 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS, and appears in the peninsular record 
quotes in Nihon shoki, though only twice in the toponym 娑陀 Sada located in 
Mimana. 

This phonogram appears seven times in the annotational notes, and 10 times 
in the poetry recorded in Shoki: 荳角、此云娑佐礙 “ ‘The name of Princess 
Sasage’ is read sasage” (NSG). 

NSK 110 

烏智可拕能 wotikata no The pheasants in the sparse field 

阿娑努能枳々始 asanwo no kigisi off in the distance 

騰余謀佐儒 toyomosazu are making noise— 

倭例播禰始柯騰 ware pa nesikado we have slept without a sound, 

比騰曾騰余謀須 pito so toyomosu how people are making a fuss! 

 

柴 


OJ: sa OC: *dzrê 

LH: dʑɛ EMC: dʑaɨ GO: zia KN: sai 

NOM: sài, sầy, thày SV: sài, sái SK: si 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. The oldest known usage of this 
phonogram in Japan is on the Sumida Hachiman mirror inscription, which is of 
unclear date, but which must date from at least the early seventh century, perhaps 
earlier. On that inscription is the toponym 意柴沙加宮 osesaka MIYA ‘the 


Palace of Osesaka.’ This one place name has caused much debate, because many 
scholars wish to make this Oshizaka Palace (忍坂宮)。As Ōno has already noted 
(1977:832), the phonogram 忍 is read osa in Nihon shoki, so a reading of osa is 
not unprecedented, but as the LH data suggest, this appears to have been ose, and 
then underwent vowel raising to osi. 

This phonogram also appears twice in Man’yōshū, both times to write 
nadusapi ‘glide along.’ 

MYS 1750 

暇有者 ITOMA ARABA If we have time 

魚津柴比渡 NADUsapi WATARI how I would like 

向峯之 MUKATWO NO to glide over and cross the river 

櫻花毛 SAKURA NO PANA mo and break off a blossom 

折末思物緒 WORAmasi MONO WO of the cherry tree. 

 

舎 


OJ: sa OC: *lhaʔ or *lhah 

LH: śaʔ or śah EMC: sjaʔ or sjah GO: sia KN: sia 

NOM: xá SV: sá, xá, xả SK: sya 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram also belongs to the PBS, appearing on the Kwangkaytho 
stele, transcribing these place names: 古舎蔦城 *kosatio fortress, and 旻舎獲 
城 *mosakak fortress. 

This phonogram also is used in Nihon shoki, a few times in the peninsular 
source material, and then in the main text of the Japanese annal. The peninsular 
example appears in Book 19, with the name 奴弖大舎 glossed as nute dasa. 
Shaku Nihongi preserves a quote from Shiki which says, “大 is read da, and 舎 
is read sa.” 

As is clear from the record of Samguk sagi, and Chinese records, dasa is the 
12th rank of the Silla court ranking system. Thus this man’s name is Nute of the 
12th rank. It should be noted, however, that at the PBS level this graph may 
actually transcribe sia [ʃa]. This possibility is further noted below. 

This phonogram is also used three times in Nihon shoki’s poetry: 

NSK 68 

等虚辭陪迩 tokosipe ni Shall I ever see you 

枳彌母阿閇揶毛 kimi mo apeya mo consistently? (Likely not) 

異舎儺等利 isana tori (I wish you would visit) like 

宇彌能波摩毛能 umi no pamamo no the seaweed near the beach, 

余留等枳等枳弘 yoru tokitoki wo seldom washed ashore— 

Notice how this graph is used in the Bussokuseki poems to transcribe the 
name of Śākya (釋迦): 舎加. The name Śākya appears twice in the 21-poem 
sequence, both times written with this phonogram. This makes me believe that 
here, at least, the graph was intended to be read sia. 

 

作 


OJ: sa, saka, saku OC: *tsâk 

LH: tsɑk EMC: tsâk GO: saku, sa KN: saku 

NOM: tác SV: tảc, tố SK: cak 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The phonogram 作 was used for its 
phonetic reading, and the final velar originally was ignored. This phonogram 
appears as early as the Suiko era corpus. The genealogy of Prince Shōtoku has 
the name of Princess Sasa written 作作女王, but as Ōno points out, this may be 
nothing more than a miscopy of the graph 佐 (1977:23). For now I treat this as 
the original. The Go-on reading of sa is found in 27 different manuscripts of 
Hokekyō ongi (Ogura 1995.2:191–200), so it cannot be ignored. 

This phonogram also appears once in the annotational notes and twice in the 
poetry of Nihon shoki, but notice that both examples precede a velar-initial 
graph: 事瑕、此云居騰作柯 “ ‘break a contract’ is read kotosaka” (NSG). 

NSK 108 

武舸都烏爾 mukatuwo ni On the peak over there 

陀底屢制囉我 tateru sera ga that person standing 

儞古泥擧曾 nikwode koso with soft hands— 

倭我底烏騰羅毎 wa ga te wo torame he should take my hand. 

拕我佐基泥 ta ga sakwide These dry, cracked hands, 

作基泥曾母野 sakwide so moya who would take my hand 

倭我底騰羅須謀野 wa ga te torasu mo ya in his own hands? 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, used five times. 

MYS 221 

妻毛有者 TUMA mo ARABA If your spouse were here also 

採而多宜麻之 TUMITE tagemasi you would pick and eat herbs— 

作美乃山 sami no YAMA has not the best time passed for 

野上乃宇波疑 NWO NO UPE no upagwi the starwort growing 

過去計良受也 SUGWINIkerazu ya in the fields of Mount Sami? 

There are a few examples where the phonogram 作 is used to represent saka 
or saku. The well known example of the province 美作 Mimasaka is one 
example. In Shoku Nihongi the name 紀朝臣作良 Kwi ASOMI Sakura appears 
(778.1.16). This last example of sakura ‘cherry’ also appears in Man’yōshū: 作 
楽花 sakuraBANA ‘cherry blossoms’ (MYS 3309), which appears to have a dual 
role, as it can also visually mean ‘the flower that makes music.’ 

 

者 


OJ: sa OC: *tâ 

LH: tśaʔ EMC: tśjaʔ GO: sia KN: sia 

NOM: giả SV: giả SK: ca 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram 者 was not very 
popular, because it had a more fitting function in classical Chinese, that of 
marking a topic. This worked nicely, when the graph 者 was used to represent 
the Japanese topicalizer, pa. 

In a document preserved in the Shōsōin we find 達者牛甘 Tasa [NO] 
USIKAPI. A related representation of this name is found in Shoku Nihongi: 達沙 
牛養 Tasa [NO] USIKAPI (761.5.13). 

The phonogram 者 also appears in Man’yōshū, where it is used four times. 
Below is a poem where the graph 者 is used twice, once as a topic marker, and 
once as a phonogram. 


MYS 985 

天尓座 AME ni MASU Master Tsukiyomi 

月讀壮子 TUKWIYOMI WOTOKWO who resides in the heavens— 

幣者将為 MAPI PA SEMU I offer you a gift, so make 

今夜乃長者 KOYOPI no NAGAsa the length of our night tonight 

五百夜継許増 IPOYWO TUGI koso five hundred nights joined together. 

 

紗 


OJ: sa OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: saɨ GO: sa KN: sa 

NOM: sa SV: sa SK: sa 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears primarily in Man’yōshū. As 
noted above under 沙, there is some confusion in the various witnesses of 
Man’yōshū, where it is difficult to determine if the archetype is 沙 or 紗. The 
example below is one of the few where the witnesses agree, and it is easy to see 
why 紗 is the intended graph, as this stanza contains two other graphs with the 
‘thread’ radical. 

MYS 1851 

青柳之 AWOYAGWI NO How beautiful are the string-like 

絲乃細紗 ITWO no KUPASIsa branches of the green willow tree. 

春風尓 PARU KAZE ni How I wish I could show 

不乱伊間尓 MIDARENU ima ni this sight to someone before 

令視子裳欲得 MISEMU KWO MOGAMO the spring wind disturbs it. 

 

草 


OJ: sa OC: *tshûʔ 

LH: tshouʔ EMC: tshâuʔ GO: sau KN: sau 

NOM: thảo, thau SV: thảo SK: chwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Man’yōshū three times. 

MYS 3678 

伊毛乎於毛比 imo wo omopi Thinking about my beloved 

伊能祢良延奴尓 i no nerayenu ni I cannot fall asleep. 

安伎乃野尓 aki no NWO ni Out in the autumn field 

草乎思香奈伎都 sawosiKA nakitu a stag has cried out, 

追麻於毛比可祢弖 tuma omopikanete unable to bear thinking of its mate. 

 

瑳 


OJ: sa OC: *tshâiʔ 

LH: tshɑiʔ EMC: tshâʔ LMC: tsha GO: sa KN: sa 

NOM: NA SV: tha, thả, thá SK: cha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears once in the annotational 
notes and 13 times in the poetry in Nihon shoki: 坂下、此云瑳伽梅苔 “ ‘base 
of the hill’ is read sakamoto” (NSG). 

NSK 47 

虚呂望虚曾 koromo koso It may be pleasing 

赴多幣茂豫耆 putapye mo yoki to wear two layers of robes, 

瑳用廼虚烏 saywodoko wo but how appalling that you 


那羅陪務耆瀰破 narabemu kimi pa would put two women’s 

介辭古耆呂介茂 kasikwokiro kamo sleeping places side by side. 

The phonogram 瑳 also appears in Fudoki fragments, but some manuscripts 
have apparently mistakenly copied 瑳 as 縒, which transcribes si. One example 
is from a song preserved in a fragment of Hizen fudoki: 區瑳刀理 kusa twori 
‘take (pull) herbs.’ 

 

磋 


OJ: sa OC: *tshâi 

LH: tshɑi EMC: tshâ LMC: tsha GO: sa KN: sa 

NOM: tha SV: tha SK: cha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears but once in the poetry of 
Nihon shoki: 

NSK 46 

于磨臂苔能 umapito no I tell you plainly, 

多菟屢虚等太氐 taturu kotodate making a nobleman’s promise— 

于磋由豆流 usayuduru she is only 

多曳麼菟餓務珥 tayema tugamu ni a spare bowstring for the time 

奈羅陪氐毛餓望 narabete mo ga mo when the one I have breaks. 

 

狹 


OJ: sa OC: *ɡrêp 

LH: ɡɛp EMC: ɣăp GO: gefu KN: kafu 

NOM: hẹp SV: hiệp SK: hyep 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ sa, meaning ‘narrow.’ This 
phonogram was popular and appears in most records from the late Asuka era on, 
though it is mainly used in toponyms and personal names. For example, in Kojiki, 
there are several names of islands and deities written with this phonogram: 淡道 
之穂之狹別嶋 APADI NO PONOSA WAKE SIMA ‘Awaji no Honosa Wake Island’ 
(KG), 天之狹手依比賣 AME NO SADE YWORI Pimye ‘Princess Ame no 
Sadeyori’ (KG). Also several words are formed with this graph: 狹霧 SAKWIRI 
‘mist’ and 狹蝿 SAPAPE ‘spring flies.’ It is not clear what this prefix sa means, 
though most scholars agree that as it appears primarily in poetry as opposed to 
prose it may be an honorific or beautifier for nouns. 

This usage appears 145 times (cf. Ōno 1977:803) in Nihon shoki, in names 
like 國狹槌尊 KUNI SATUTI [NO] MIKOTO (NSG), also known as 國狹立尊 
KUNI SATATI [NO] MIKOTO (NSG), 泉津日狹女 YOMOTU PISAMYE (NSG), 
and toponyms like 狹城池 SAKWI [NO] IKE ‘the Saki Pond’ (NSG). 

This usage also appears in Man’yōshū some 41 times. 

MYS 19 

綜麻形乃 PESWOKATA no Like the black alder tree 

林始乃 PAYASI NO SAKI no on the edge of the woods 

狭野榛能 SANWO PARI no in Hesokata, my beloved— 

衣尓著成 KINU ni TUKU NASU you color my eyes 

目尓都久和我勢 ME ni tuku wa ga se as robes dyed in color. 

 


猿 


OJ: sa OC: *wan 

LH: wan EMC: jwɐn GO: won KN: wen 

NOM: vượn SV: viên SK: wen 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ saru ‘monkey.’ This usage appears in 
Shoku Nihongi, in one toponym: 猿嶋郡 SASIMA District (769.8.14), and the 
name 安倍猿嶋 Ape SASIMA (773.2.8). There is a possibility that this usage 
also appears in Man’yōshū in one poem. That poem, MYS 1827, contains the 
stanza 狭帆之内敝 SAPO NO UTI pye ‘toward Saho.’ Some manuscripts have 
猨 instead of 狭. The difficulty is that both can be read sa. The phonogram 猨 
is a variant form of 猿. 

 

羅 


OJ: sa OC: *râi 

LH: lai EMC: lâ GO: ra KN: ra 

NOM: la, là SV: la SK: la 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ sa ‘silk gauze.’ This is likely a loan 
from Chinese 紗 ‘silk gauze.’ This usage is only found in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 1159 

住吉之 SUMINOYE NO How clear the sound 

岸之松根 KWISI NO MATUGANE of the waves that come 

打曝 UTISARASI crashing in and wash 

縁来浪之 YOSEKURU NAMI NO the trunks of the pine trees 

音之清羅 OTO NO SAYAKESA on the beach of Suminoe. 

 

相 


OJ: saga, sagu OC: *saŋ or *saŋh 

LH: siaŋ or siaŋh EMC: sjaŋ or sjaŋh GO: sau KN: siau 

NOM: tướng, tương SV: tướng SK: syang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage is preserved mainly in 
toponyms, most notably 相武 Sagamu, later transcribed as 相模. This later 
becomes Sagami. In Harima fudoki there are toponyms such as 安相里 Asagu 
Village and 阿相郡 Asagu District. Later scholars would rather read these two 
as asako, but I view sagu as representing a dialect version where the vowel has 
raised: *o > u. 

A fragment of the now lost Yamashiro fudoki contains this information: 相 
樂郡内久江里 ‘The KuYE Village within the Sagaraka District.’ 

 

倉 


OJ: sagu OC: *tshâŋ 

LH: tshaŋ EMC: tshâŋ GO: sau KN: sau 

NOM: thương SV: thảng, thương SK: chang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This rare usage appears in a toponym 
recorded in a fragment of the Yōrō Census (721): 倉麻郡 Saguma District. 

 


積 


OJ: saka OC: *tsek or *tsekh 

LH: tsiek or tsieh EMC: tsjäk or tsjeh GO: siaku KN: seki 

NOM: tích SV: tích SK: cyek, co 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. In the Asago District register of 
Yamashiro Province, dated 733, the toponym 積太郡 Sakata District appears. 
In a different Shōsōin document, the name 生江臣積多 IKUYE OMI Sakata 
appears. In Shoku Nihongi we find a personal name, 丈 部 造 智 積 
PATUKAPIBYE MIYATUKWO Tisaka (715.3.25) and a toponym: 安積郡 
Asaka District (718.5.2). Another interesting example of Asaka appears in 
Man’yōshū: 

MYS 3807 

安積香山 asaKA YAMA Mount Asaka— 

影副所見 KAGE SAPE MIYURU like the mountain spring 

山井之 YAMA NO WI NO where the reflection is visible 

淺心乎 ASAKI KOKORO wo I do not reflect upon you 

吾念莫國 WA GA OMOPANAKU NI with a shallow heart. 

Here the poet writes out the name of the mountain with three graphs, 
representing a-sa-ka, but it is also plausible that this type of writing is influenced 
by peninsula habits, where short vowels were represented by writing a geminate, 
for example, a velar-final graph, and then a velar initial graph: 積香 sak-ka. 

 

尺 


OJ: saka OC: *thak ? 

LH: tśhak EMC: tśhjäk GO: siaku KN: seki 

NOM: xách, xế, xệch SV: sích, xích SK: chyek 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. Perhaps the most well known example is 
in Nihon shoki, 船史惠尺 PUNA PUBITO Wesaka, who rescued part of the 
history supposedly compiled by Shōtoku Taishi and Soga no Umako when it was 
burned during the downfall of the Soga. Shoku Nihongi includes these other 
examples: 狹井宿祢尺麻呂 SAWI [NO] Sukune Sakamaro (700.6.17), 文忌寸 
尺加 PUMU [NO] IMIKI Saka (704.1.7) [some manuscripts have 釋加], and 尺度 
池 Sakatwo IKE ‘Sakato Pond’ (781.7.19). 

On a wooden document excavated from the Nara capital ruins, we find: 伯 
耆国汗入郡尺刀郷・・・天平十七年十月 ‘Papaki Province ASIRI District 
Sakatwo Village...10th month of 745...’ (MK 360). 

This phonogramy appears in Man’yōshū in examples like the note to MYS 
3821 右時有娘子 姓尺度氏也 ‘The poem to the right refers to when there 
was a young maiden, whose surname was Sakatwo.’ 

 

釋 


OJ: saka OC: *lhak 

LH: śak EMC: śjäk GO: siaku KN: seki 

NOM: thích SV: thích SK: syek 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The best known example with this is the 
transcriptional name for 釋迦 Śākyamuni. In Shoku Nihongi, the name of 
PUNA Wesaka is represented as 惠釋 (700.3.10). Also, as noted above under 


尺, 文忌寸尺加 PUMU [NO] IMIKI Saka (704.1.7) in some manuscripts is 
written as 釋加. 

 

跡 


OJ: saki OC: *tsjak 

LH: tsiak EMC: tsjäk GO: siaku KN: seki 

NOM: tích SV: tích SK: cyek 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. There is only one example that I can 
find in the ancient corpus, in Harima fudoki: 麻跡里 Masaki Village; however, 
on a wooden document excavated from a dig site in Kyōto the following appears: 
播磨国飾磨郡真跡郷 Parima Province Sikama District, MAsaki Village 
(unnumbered tablet). 

 

參 


OJ: sama, sami OC: *srəm or *tshə̂ m 

LH: s̘im or tshəm EMC: s̘ jəm or tshâm GO: samu KN: samu 

NOM: sâm, tham SV: sâm, tham SK: sam, cham, som, chom 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. Shoku Nihongi records, 從相模國夷參 
驛 “From the relay station of Isama in Sagami Province...” (771.10.27). In two 
separate documents preserved in Shōsōin we find the name Yosami represented 
as 与參 and 預參. 

 

三 


OJ: samu OC: *sə̂ m 

LH: sam or səm EMC: sâm GO: samu KN: samu 

NOM: tam SV: tam SK: sam 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only twice in Man’yōshū. In 
one particular poem the use of numerals is part of the orthographic architecture. 

MYS 907 

瀧上之 TAKI NO PE NO Like the spruce tree that 

御舟乃山尓 MIPUNE no YAMA ni extends its unblemished branches 

水枝指 MIDUYE SASI which fill the tree growing 

四時尓生有 sizi ni OPITARU on Mount Mifune 

刀我乃樹能 twoga no KWI no that is above the waterfall, 

弥継嗣尓 IYA TUGITUGI ni is not the Akizu Palace 

萬代 YORODU YO NI in Miyoshino 

如是二二知三 KAKU SI SIRAsamu where she shall reign 

三芳野之 MIYOSINWO NO for ten thousand generations 

蜻蛉乃宮者 AKIDU no MIYA PA in continuing succession 

神柄香 KAMUKARA KA dignified in this way 

貴将有 TAPUTWOKU ARURAMU with its divine nature? 

Several numeric tricks are employed here: 四時 ‘four times’ calls to mind 
the four seasons, with the time the poem was composed referring to the best of 
times. 二二 is a mathematical equation, where 2+2=4 (si). 三 in the stanza 如 
是二二知三 is to be read as a phonogram samu. In the very next stanza, 
however, the reader is required to process 三芳野 as miyosinwo. 

 


散 


OJ: sani, sa OC: *sânʔ or *sâns 

LH: sanʔ or sanh EMC: sânʔ or sânh GO: samu KN: san 

NOM: tan, tản SV: tản, tán SK: san 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears seven times in Man’yōshū, 
four times to represent sa and three times to represent sani. Below is an example 
of each. 

MYS 31 

左散難弥乃 sasanami no The great inlet 

志我能大和太 siga no OPOwada of Shiga in Sasanami— 

與杼六友 yodoMU TOMO though it quietly waits, 

昔人二 MUKASI NO PITO ni will it ever be able to meet 

亦母相目八毛 MATA mo APAMEYAmo those people of ancient days? 

MYS 2523 

散頬相 saniTURAPU Red with color— 

色者不出 IRO PA IDEZU it does not show on my face 

小文 SUKUNAKU mo but at least 

心中 KOKORO NO UTI NI within my heart 

吾念名君 WA GA OMOPANAku ni I am thinking of you. 

In a legendary story preserved in Harima fudoki, Great King Richū 
supposedly traveled to Harima, and on the way he arrived at a place called 
Wanasa of Apa Province (阿波和那散). 

 

戔 


OJ: sano OC: *dzân 

LH: dzan EMC: dzân LMC: tsɦan GO: zan KN: san 

NOM: tàn SV: tàn SK: can, cyen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in Nihon shoki to transcribe 
the name of Susanowo (素戔嗚尊). 

 

贊 


OJ: sano, sanu, sa OC: *tsâns 

LH: tsanh EMC: tsânh GO: samu KN: san 

NOM: tán SV: tán SK: chan 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The well known usage is 贊岐 Sanuki, 
though the variant 讃岐 Sanuki gains greater popularity as time goes on. In 
Harima fudoki the name of Saywotu Pimye is transcribed as 贊用都比賣命. On 
the Takada Village stone memorial from 726 we find the following toponyms: 
上野国群馬郡下賛郷高田里 Takada Hamlet in Lower Sano Village in Kurima 
District of UPATUKENWO Province. Ōno (1977:832) notes that the reading of 
sano for 賛 is not secure, but it should be mentioned that the tradition in 
Takazaki City where the stone resides is that the village is later known as Lower 
Sano Village (下佐野). 

 

讃 


OJ: sanu, sa OC: *tsâns 

LH: tsanh EMC: tsân GO: samu KN: san 

NOM: tán SV: tán SK: chan 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The toponym 讃岐 is perhaps the best 
known example of this usage. In Harima fudoki this is written in a number of 
different ways: 讚伎 and 讚藝 sanuki. Such examples appear in Kojiki, Nihon 
shoki, Man’yōshū, and other Nara era records. There are also several examples 
where this phonogram is used to represent sa. In Harima fudoki there is 讚容郡 
Saywo District. The following inscription appears on a wooden document 
excavated from the Nara Capital: 讃良郡山家郷人宗我部飯麻呂馬・・・天 
平 十 八 年 四 月 廿 三日 ‘The horse of SwogaBYE IPImaro, who is from 
YAMAPYE Village in Sarara District....23rd day of the fourth month of the 18th 
year of Tenpyō (746)...’ (unnumbered tablet). This interesting reading of sarara 
for 讃良 is likely due to assimilation of -n- to -r-: *san-ra > *sanara > sarara. 

 

雜 


OJ: sapa, sapi, sapu OC: *dzə̂ p 

LH: dzəp EMC: dzəp LMC: tsɦap GO: zafu KN: safu 

NOM: tạp SV: tạp SK: cap 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. In a document preserved in Shōsōin the 
toponym 雜太 Sapata appears. This same name appears in Shoku Nihongi: 雜 
太郡 Sapata District (721.4.20). In another document the name 雜物 sapimoti 
appears. In Shoku Nihongi the name 紀朝臣雜物 Kwi ASOMI Sapimoti appears 
(728.5.21). In Izumo fudoki the toponym 佐雜埼 Sasapu Cape is recorded. 

This usage also appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1273 

住吉 SUMINOYE NO The riding coat 

波豆麻公之 paduma NO KIMI GA of Lord Hazuma of Suminoe 

馬乗衣 UMA NORI KOROMO is a garment sewn by 

雜豆臈 sapidurapu a foreign girl 

漢女乎座而 AYAMYE wo SUWETE with chirping speech 

縫衣叙 NUPYERU KOROMO zo that he made sit and sew. 

 

匝 


OJ: sapi, sa OC: *tsə̂ p 

LH: tsəp EMC: tsập GO: safu KN: safu 

NOM: táp, tấp SV: tap SK: cap 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage appears once in Nihon shoki, 
in the name 匝布屯倉 Sapo Granary. As noted before, this type of usage may 
have a peninsular influence, where peninsular transcriptions often use geminate 
consonants, perhaps to demonstrate that the preceding vowel is short. Here we 
have sap-po. This usage appears once on a mokkan: 備前国赤坂郡周匝郷 
Bizen Province Akasaka District Susapi Village (MK 311). 

This phonogram 匝 also appears once in Man’yōshū, representing sapi. 

MYS 443 

牛留鳥 NIPODORI NO Standing then sitting there, 

名津匝来与 NADUsapi KOMU TO wondering if he’ll return, gliding 

立居而 TATITE WITE down the road, like little grebes, 

待監人者 MATIkyemu PITO PA the person who surely is waiting 


王之 OPOKIMI NO obeys in reverence the august words 

命恐 MIKOTO KASIKWOMI of the great ruler 

押光 OSITERU until the new regnal year, 

難波國尓 nanipa NO KUNI ni rough like jewels, is decided upon 

荒玉之 ARATAMA NO in the land of Naniwa 

年經左右二 TOSI PURU MADE ni where the sunlight pushes through. 

 

颯 


OJ: sapu OC: *sə̂ p 

LH: səp EMC: sâ̘ p GO: safu KN: safu 

NOM: táp SV: táp SK: sap 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 430 

八雲刺 YAKUMO SASU The black hair of 

出雲子等 IDUMWO NO KWORA GA the maidens of Izumo 

黒髪者 KURWOKAMI PA where eight clouds pierce through 

吉野川 YOSINWO NO KAPA NO is floating lithely in the offing 

奥名豆颯 OKI NI NAdusapu of the river of Yoshino. 

 

薩 


OJ: sati, satwo, satu OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: sat LMC: sat GO: sati KN: satu 

NOM: tát SV: tát SK: sal 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS when representing sati, but belongs to the 
CBS when representing satu. The single instance of sato likely belongs to the CBS, 
but may preserve a variant form that later underwent vowel raising: *wo > u. 

The LJS usage first appears in a document in Shōsōin, with the name: 茨田 
連薩毛智 MAMUTA MURAZI Satumoti. This usage also appears in Shoku 
Nihongi in the following names: 大伴宿祢小薩 OPOTOMO Sukune WOsati 
(763.1.9), and 大 伴 古薩 OPOTOMO Kwosati (764.9.29). Interestingly, in 
Hitachi fudoki the following toponym is recorded: 薩都里 Satu Village. This 
likely is a transcription influenced by peninsular practice, where sat-tu becomes 
satu. 

The CBS usage appears in Nihon shoki. It also appears in the following 
names in Shoku Nihongi: 薩末比賣 Satuma Pimye (700.6.3), 薩摩多褹 Tane 
of Satuma (702.8.1), and 藤原朝臣薩雄 PUDIPARA ASOMI SatuWO (757.4.4). 
This usage also appears three times in Man’yōshū, in the toponym 薩摩 Satuma 
(MYS 248) and twice to represent satuwo ‘hunter.’ 

MYS 2147 

山邊尓 YAMA NO pye ni Though there are many 

射去薩雄者 IYUKU satuwo PA hunters who come and go 

雖大有 OPOKAREDO near the mountain, 

山尓文野尓文 YAMA nimo NWO nimo the stags cry out, 

紗少壮鹿鳴母 saWOSIKA NAKU mo in both the mountains and fields. 

The single instance of sato occurs in the Yamashiro toponym 邑薩里 
Oposatwo Village, as preserved in documents in Shōsōin. Other records record 
this toponym as 大里 OPOSATWO, attesting to the height of the final vowel. 


 

刷 


OJ: satu OC: *srot 

LH: ṣuat EMC: s̘ jwät LMC: ʂɰa:t GO: sati LN: satu 

NOM: loát, loạt SV: loát SK: swal 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This phonogram appears in Shoku 
Nihongi in the name 藤原朝臣刷雄 PUDIPARA ASOMI SatuWO (752.3.9). 

 

早 


OJ: sawa OC: *tsûʔ 

LH: tsouʔ EMC: tsâuʔ GO: sau KN: sau 

NOM: tảo SV: tảo SK: cwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage appears in Shoku Nihongi: 
早良 Sawara (781.4.4). The same usage also appears in a document preserved in 
the Shōsōin: 早良 Sawara. 

 

草 


OJ: sawa OC: *tshûʔ 

LH: tshouʔ EMC: tshâuʔ GO: sau KN: sau 

NOM: thảo, thau SV: thảo SK: chwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This appears in a document preserved in 
the Shōsōin, with the name 草良部 SawaraBYE. On a mokkan from a dig in 
Shizuoka we find 草良臣 Sawara OMI (MK 12). 

 

最 


OJ: sayo OC: *tsôs 

LH: tsuas EMC: tswâih GO: sai KN: sai 

NOM: tối SV: tối SK: chwoy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. One example appears in Izumo fudoki: 
最邑 Sayo Village. 

 

斯 


OJ: se > si OC: *se 

LH: sie EMC: sje GO: si KN: si 

NOM: NA SV: tư SK: sa 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. As the Old Chinese and Later Han data 
point out, this graph was read *se. While there is no Nom data, related graphs 
such as 厮廝嘶 all are read tê in Nom, attesting to the height of the vowel. See 
the explanation of this graph under 斯 OJ: si. 

 

齊 


OJ: se OC: *dzî 

LH: dzei EMC: dziei GO: zai KN: sei 

NOM: trai, chay, chây SV: tề, trai, chay SK: co, cyey, coy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears once in an indirect quote 
from a Paekche record. There the Paekche king, Cik-ci (直支王), sends his 
younger sister to the court. Her name is recorded as 新齊都媛 Sisetu Pime. 


This phonogram is also used nine times in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 

NSK 51 

那珥波譬苔 nanipa pito Men of Naniwa! 

須儒赴泥苔羅齊 suzu pune torase Grab the rope to the bell-boat. 

許辭那豆瀰 kosi nadumi Get up to your waist in 

曾能赴尼苔羅齊 sono pune torase the water and pull that boat! 

於朋瀰赴泥苔禮 opomipune tore Pull the great boat in. 

This phonogram is also found in Man’yōshū only once, to transcribe the 
place name 安齊可我多 aseka gata ‘the salty beach of Aseka’ (MYS 3503). 

 

西 


OJ: se OC: *sî < *snî 

LH: sei EMC: siei GO: sai KN: sei 

NOM: tây SV: tây, tê SK: sye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram also belongs to the PBS. This assignment is based on the 
inscription on the Kwangkaytho stele. The opening paragraph of the stele 
contains this toponym: 忽本西城 *huət-pən-sei fortress. It is also used in the 
following personal names found on a Silla stele. On the Tanyang border stele we 
find 西夫叱智 *sei-puɑ-tshit-ʈeh. 

This phonogram does not appear in any early Japanese documents, but does 
surface in 702, in the Mino Census: 乎布西 Wopuse, 知西売 Tisemye, 伊波 
西 Ipase, 小西爾 KWOseni. There are fragments of this usage on mokkan: 布 
西里□軍布 ‘military blanket…Puse Village’ (MK 1642), and 西奈里 Sena 
Village (unnumbered tablet). 

This phonogram appears five times in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 

NSK 75 

倭我伊麻西麼 wa ga imaseba As I sit here, 

佐謂麻都登 sawi matu to waiting for the boar, 

倭我陀々西麼 wa ga tataseba as I rise to my feet, 

陀倶符羅爾 takubura ni a horsefly lands 

阿武柯枳都枳 amu kakituki on my arm and bites me. 

This phonogram appears about 22 times in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 4378 

都久比夜波 tukupi ya pa The moon and sun 

須具波由氣等毛 sugu pa yukyedomo do trek across the sky, 

阿母志々可 amo sisi ka but we do not forget 

多麻乃須我多波 tama no sugata pa the jewel-like forms 

和須例西奈布母 wasuresenapu mo of our mothers and fathers. 

 

洒 


OJ: se OC: *sriʔ 

LH: ṣɛiʔ EMC: ṣăj GO: sai, sia KN: sei 

NOM: sái, rải, rái, vẩy SV: sái SK: syey, say, sway, sa 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram also belongs to the PBS. It appears in the peninsular records 
quoted in Nihon shoki, specifically in a personal name. In the record of Kinmei 
the name 許勢臣 Kose OMI appears, and then a quote from Paekche ponki notes 
that the person is called 既洒臣. This name is glossed kose; thus we have a 


fortunate case where a specific name is written two different ways. Because of 
the date of the Paekche writing (early seventh century), it is tempting to see this 
name as actually written with graphs reconstructed by Miyake (2003a:231) *kəsəy. 
Notice that 洒 is LH sei, and 勢 is MC śjäih, suggesting that there was an 
offglide at least until the early seventh century. 

 

施 


OJ: se OC: *lhai 

LH: śɑi EMC: śje GO: se KN: si 

NOM: thí, thia, the, thè SV: thi, thí SK: si, i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS, but was not used much by the Japanese 
until it was reintroduced into the orthographic system based on LMC (and then 
belonged to the CBS), and transcribed si (see 施 si). 

This phonogram is used to write the Paekche eighth rank in Nihon shoki: 施 
徳 śɑi-tək. This same rank is quoted in Zhou zhu, written the same as in Nihon 
shoki. Shoki glosses the reading as setoku. Interestingly, the name recorded in 
Shoki with this rank has a Japanese surname—Mononobe (cf. Ienaga et al. 
1986.2:76). There also is a Japanese monk, named 恵施 Wese, who is sent to 
China to study. The texts gloss this 施 as se showing that the reading continued 
until the introduction of LMC. 

 

勢 


OJ: se OC: *nhets < *hŋets 

LH: śas EMC: śjäih GO: se KN: sei 

NOM: thế SV: thế, thể SK: syey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, and was the basic phonogram to 
transcribe OJ se. This phonogram appears in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu, an early 
Heian compilation, but which has relied on much earlier documents. It contains 
usages such as 伊勢神 ise [NO] KAMWI ‘the deity of Ise,’ 佐勢 sase ‘Sase, a 
toponym,’ and 巨勢 kose ‘Kose, a surname.’ This phonogram appears on a 
number of mokkan, the majority to transcribe Ise (伊勢). There is also 山背国久 
勢郡 Yamasiro Province Kuse District (unnumbered tablet), and 巨勢若守 
Kose WAKAMORI (unnumbered tablet). 

This is the primarily phonogram used in Kojiki for se: 那勢 nase ‘my 
beloved’ (KG), 伊呂勢 irose ‘older brother by the same mother’ (KG), 伊勢能 
宇美 ise no umi ‘the sea of Ise’ (KG). 

This phonogram also appears in many Kojiki songs. 

KK 101 

登余美岐 toyomiki Present to him 

多弖麻都良勢 tatematurase the bountiful wine! 

許登能 koto no These are words 

加多理碁登母 katarigoto mo that have been handed down 

許袁婆 ko woba by us. 

This phonogram also appears once in annotational notes and 11 times in the 
poetry of Nihon shoki: 吾夫君此云阿我儺勢 “ ‘My beloved lord’ is read aga 
nase” (NSG). 


NSK 27 

烏波利珥 wopari ni Here stands a pine 

多陀珥霧伽弊流 tada mukapyeru facing straight in 

比苔菟麻菟阿波例 pitotu matu apare the direction of Owari; 

比等菟麻菟 pitotu matu yes, a single pine. 

比苔珥阿利勢麼 pito ni ariseba If this tree were a man, 

岐農岐勢摩之塢 kinu kisemasi wo I would dress you in your 

 garments. 

多知波開摩之塢 tati pakemasi wo I would gird you with your 

 sword. 

The phonogram 勢 is also one of the main graphs in Man’yōshū to 
transcribe se: 吾勢子 WA GA seKWO ‘my beloved’ (MYS 11), 勢能山 se no 
YAMA ‘Mount Se’ (MYS 35), 巨勢道 koseDI ‘the Kose Road’ (MYS 50), 伊勢 
能国 ise no KUNI ‘the province of Ise’ (MYS 162), and 伊勢海 ise [NO] UMI 
‘sea of Ise’(MYS 600). 

 

世 


OJ: se OC: *lhats 

LH: śas EMC: śjäih GO: se KN: sei 

NOM: thá, thế, thé SV: thế SK: syey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It appears in the 702 Mino Census in 
personal names: 奈世麻呂 Nasemaro, 止世売 Tosemye, 麻加世 Makase. 
This phonogram appears on a number of mokkan: 粟田戸世万呂 KURITA 
PEsemaro (MK 145), 伊世国奄伎郡 Ise Province Amuki District (unnumbered 
tablet), and 田辺久世万呂 TABYE Kusemaro (MKK 22:287). 

This phonogram also appears in Kojiki: 阿世袁 ase wo ‘rhythmical words’ 
(homophonic with ase ‘my beloved,’ KG), 宇那賀麻世流 unagaseru ‘(the 
jewels) put around (your) neck’ (KG), 波都世能夜麻能 patuse no yama no 
‘(the great peak) of Mount Hatsuse that…’ (KG). 

KK 89 

許母理久能 komoriku no The place that is hidden— 

波都世能夜麻能 patuse no yama no on the great peak 

意富袁爾波 opowo nipa of Mount Hatsuse 

波多波理陀弖 pata paridate I plant and spread out an ensign. 

Ōno (1977:209) notes that the first half of the first book of Kojiki relies 
heavily on the graph 勢 for se, but the last half relies heavily on 世, a 
distinction that appears to have some import, though he does not specify what it 
may be. 

This phonogram also appears once in the annotational notes and five times in 
the poetry of Nihon shoki: 経湍此云俯世 “(The place name) 経湍 is read puse” 
(KG). 

NSK 115 

舸娜紀都該 kanakwi tuke The steed that I kept 

阿我柯賦古磨播 aga kapu kwoma pa bridled with hard wood 

比枳涅世儒 pikide sezu was never allowed outside. 

阿我柯賦古磨乎 aga kapu kwoma wo How has someone found 

比騰瀰都羅武箇 pito mituramu ka that steed that I nurtured? 


This phonogram appears regularly in Man’yōshū, some 210 times, so that it 
stands with 勢 as one of the two primary graphs to transcribe se in the 
anthology. 

MYS 3671 

奴婆多麻乃 nubatama no If I were the moon 

欲和多流月尓 ywo wataru TUKWI ni that traverses the night sky 

安良麻世婆 aramaseba black as ink 

伊敝奈流伊毛尓 ipye naru imwo ni then I would be able to come 

安比弖許麻之乎 apite komasi wo meet my beloved who is home. 

 

制 


OJ: se OC: *kets or *tats 

LH: tśas EMC: tśjäih LMC: tʂiaj GO: sei KN: sei 

NOM: chế, chơi SV: chế SK: cyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to LJS, and appears once in the annotational notes 
and eight times in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 兄此云制 “ ‘older brother,’ this is 
read se” (NSG). 

NSK 126 

美曳之弩能 miyesinwo no The trout of Eshino 

曳之弩能阿喩 yesinwo no ayu beautiful Mieshino— 

阿喩擧曾播 ayu koso pa It is good for 

施麻倍母曳岐 simape mo yeki you trout to be near the island. 

愛倶流之衞 ekurusiwe Ah, how painful 

奈疑能母騰 nagwi no moto to be under the water-greens 

制利能母騰 seri no moto to be under the water cress. 

阿例播倶流之衞 are pa kurusiwe I am in pain. 

 

細 


OJ: se OC: *sîh 

LH: seih EMC: sieih LMC: siaj GO: sai KN: sei 

NOM: tế, té, tới SV: tế SK: syey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears three times in one poem in 
Nihon shoki: 

NSK 97 

莒母唎矩能 kumoriku no In the hidden land, 

簸覩細能哿波庚 patuse no kapa yu the bamboo flowing down 

那峨礼倶屢 nagarekuru the Hatsuse River— 

駄開能 take no wonderful, flourishing bamboo 

以矩美娜開余嚢開 ikumidake yodake with long joints and leaves. 

謨等陛嗚麼 motopye woba We will make a koto 

莒等儞都倶唎 koto ni tukuri out of the base of it, 

須衞陛嗚麼 suwepye woba and make a flute 

府曳儞都倶唎 puye ni tukuri out of the top of it, 

符企儺須 pukinasu and our music 

美母慮我紆陪儞 mimoro ga upe ni will reach to the top 

能朋梨陀致 nobori tati of Mount Mimoro. 

倭我彌細麼 wa ga miseba When I gaze down 


都奴娑播符 tunwo sapapu on Iware Pond 

以簸例能伊開能 ipare no ike no with rocks covered in vines 

美那矢駄府 minasitapu even the fish 

紆鳴謨 uwo mo come to the surface 

紆陪儞堤堤那皚矩 upe ni dete nageku and lament your parting. 

野須美矢々 yasumisisi And like the sash 

倭我於朋枳美能 wa ga opokimi worn by my great lord 

於魔細屢 obaseru who rules over all 

娑佐羅能美於寐能 sasara no miobi no with its dainty design, 

武須彌陀例 musubitare who is there that 

駄例夜矢比等母 dare yasi pito mo will not come out 

紆陪儞泥堤那皚矩 upe ni dete nageku and lament your parting? 

 

栖 


OJ: se OC: *sî < *snî 

LH: sei EMC: siei LMC: siaj GO: sai KN: sei 

NOM: thê SV: tê, thê SK: syey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. In most documents, this graph was used 
as a kungana representing the Old Japanese word ‘nest’ su. In Nihon shoki, 
however, this graph is used as a phonogram to transcribe se. The graph appears 
only three times in the poetry: 

NSK 106 

野麻騰能 yamato no As I say I am about 

飫斯能毘稜栖嗚 osi no pirose wo to cross the wide rapids of Oshi 

倭柁羅務騰 wataramu to in Yamato, 

阿庸比陀豆矩梨 aywopi tadukuri I tie up my leg-straps 

擧始豆矩羅符母 kosidukurapu mo and even fix my waist band. 

 

是 


OJ: se OC: *deʔ 

LH: dźeʔ EMC: źjeʔ LMC: ʂɦi GO: ze KN: si 

NOM: thị SV: thị SK: si 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This graph is well known as the oldest 
extant example of the prenasalized counterpart of se (see ze below). It is thus 
interesting that 是 appears in one annotational note in Nihon shoki: 言於母亦 
兄、於吾亦兄此云於慕尼慕是、阿例尼慕是 “ ‘To my mother he is an elder 
brother; and to me he is a husband’ is read omo nimo se, are nimo se” (NSG). In 
this example, 是 has to be read se, which meant a beloved male (cf. Martin 
1987:521). Martin wonders if se does not come from an original prenasalized ze. 
For the time being I place this usage of 是 here. 

 

劑 


OJ: se OC: *dzîh 

LH: dzeih EMC: dzieih KN: tsɦiaj GO: zai KN: sei 

NOM: tễ SV: tễ SK: co, cyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears once in Nihon shoki: 


NSK 57 

菟藝泥赴 tuginepu This woman of 

揶摩之呂謎能 yamasiromye no Yamashiro, with thick trees, 

許久波茂知 kokupa moti dug up a large radish 

于智辭於朋泥 utisi opone with a wooden hoe. 

佐和佐和珥 sawasawa ni The rustling of leaves 

儺餓伊弊劑虚會 na ga ipese koso reminds me of things you said. 

于知和多須 utiwatasu I look out and see 

椰餓波曳儺須 yaga paye nasu richly growing foliage. 

企以利摩韋區例 ki iri mawikure I have come with a rich troupe. 

There is some confusion in the manuscripts. Many manuscripts have 齋 
instead of 劑, which appears in a marginal line in the Kitano manuscript, but 
also in Shaku Nihongi. For the time being I err on the side of caution and leave 
the graph as is here. 

 

瀬 


OJ: se OC: *râts 

LH: lɑs EMC: lâih GO: rai KN: rai 

NOM: NA SV: lại SK: lai 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana where 瀬 ‘rapids’ suggests to the reader Old Japanese se 
‘rapids.’ There are several mokkan with names transcribed with this kungana: 高 
瀬村 TAKASE Village (unnumbered tablet), and 廣瀬 PIROSE (MK 802). 

This kungana also appears in Kojiki: 五瀬命 Prince ITUSE (KG), 稲瀬毘 
古王 Prince INASEbikwo (KG), and 河瀬舎人 Retainer KAPASE (KG). 

Man’yōshū also has 33 examples of this kungana, of which the following are 
representative: 泊瀬山 PATUSE YAMA ‘Mount Hatsuse’ (MYS 45), 広瀬川 
PIROSE KAPA ‘the river Hirose’ (MYS 1107), 伊波瀬乃社 ipaSE no MORI ‘the 
sacred grove of Iwase’ (MYS 1419). 

 

湍 


OJ: se OC: *thôn 

LH: thuɑn EMC: thwân GO: tamu KN: tan 

NOM: NA SV: thoan SK: tan 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana where 湍 is Chinese ‘rushing water,’ suggesting to the 
reader Old Japanese se ‘rushing water, rapids.’ This usage appears once in the 
Nihon shoki: 経湍 PUSE ‘place name Fuse’ (NSG), and in Harima fudoki: 速 
湍 PAYASE ‘village of Hayase.’ This graph also appears three times in 
Man’yōshū: 許湍乃春野 koSE no PARUNWO ‘the spring field of Kose’ (MYS 
54), 後湍山 NOTISE YAMA ‘Mount Nochise’ (MYS 739), and 泊湍川 
PATUSE KAPA ‘the Hatsuse River’ (MYS 2706). 

 

背 


OJ: se OC: *pə̂ kh 

LH: pəh EMC: pwâ̘ ih GO: fai KN: fai 

NOM: bối, bội, bồi, bổi SV: bối, bội SK: poy, phay 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, where 背 ‘back, behind’ conjures up to the mind Old 
Japanese se ‘back.’ This usage appears in the Mino Census of 701: 広背 


PIROSE and 長背 NAGASE. This usage also appears in Man’yōshū: 吾背子 
WA GA SEKWO ‘my beloved’ (MYS 268), 妹背乃山 IMOSE no YAMA ‘Mount 
Imose’ (MYS 544), and 来背社 KUSE [NO] MORI ‘the sacred grove of Kuse’ 
(MYS 1286). 

 

脊 


OJ: se OC: *tsek 

LH: tsiek EMC: tsjäk GO: siaku KN: seki 

NOM: tích SV: tích SK: chyek 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana where 脊 ‘spine’ calls to mind Old Japanese se ‘back (as 
in back bone).’ This usage appears five times in Book 6 Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1056 

𡢳嬬等之 WOTOMYERA GA Mount Kase, the spindle, 

續麻繁云 UMIWO KAKU TOPU like the thing maidens 

鹿脊之山 KASE NO YAMA wrap spun wool on, 

時之徃者 TOKIsi YUKYEREBA has changed with the times. 

京師跡成宿 MIYAKWO TO NARINU It has become a metropolis. 

 

迫 


OJ: se OC: *prâk 

LH: pak EMC: pɐk GO: faku KN: faku 

NOM: bạch, bách SV: bách SK: poyk 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana where 迫 ‘press upon’ suggests to the reader Old 
Japanese se of semaru ‘press against.’ This usage is only found once in 
Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2696 

荒熊之 ARAKUMA NO Mount Shihase 

住云山之 SUMU TO IPU YAMA NO where wild bears 

師齒迫山 siPASE YAMA are said to live— 

責而雖問 SEMETE TOPU TOMO though I ask you sternly 

汝名者不告 NA GA NA PA NORAZI you will not tell me your name. 

 

石花 



OJ: se OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: NA GO: NA KN: NA 

NOM: NA SV: NA SK: NA 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana where these two graphs together conjur up the sound. Here 
these two mean ‘flower of the rocks,’ suggesting to the reader with a knowledge 
of the area around Mount Fuji the Old Japanese word se ‘barnacle’ that cling to 
rocks along the coast like flowers. This usage appears twice in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2991 

眉隠 MAYWOGOMORI hiding in their cocoons, 

馬聲蜂音石花蜘蟵荒鹿 IBUSEKU MO ARU KA I am surrounded by gloom, 

異母二不相而 imo ni APAZUSITE because I cannot see you. 

This poem is rare in that the fourth stanza is almost completely composed of 
binomes that suggest a variety of sounds: 馬聲 ‘the (voice) sound of a horse,’ 
蜂音 ‘the sound of the bee,’ 蜘呑 ‘spider.’ It seems possible to argue that the 


poet wanted to aurally describe the feeling of loneliness through the neigh of the 
horse, the buzz of the bee, and the barnacle out in the wave-swept sea, all perhaps 
suggesting an air of gloom. 

 

 



瞻 


OJ: semi OC: *tam 

LH: tśam EMC: tśäm GO: semu KN: semu 

NOM: chiêm SV: chiêm SK: chyem 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It only appears once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 729 

玉有者 TAMA NARABA If you were jewels 

手二母将巻乎 TE nimo MAKAMU wo I would wrap you around my wrist. 

欝瞻乃 utusemi no But as you are a man 

世人有者 YO NO PITO NAREBA of the visibile world, it is difficult 

手二巻難石 TE ni MAKIGATASI to wrap you around my wrist. 

 

斯 


OJ: si < se OC: *se 

LH: sie EMC: sje GO: si KN: si 

NOM: NA SV: tư SK: sa 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. As the Old Chinese and Later Han data 
point out, this graph was earlier *se and not *si. This graph is used in Wei zhi in a 
personal name 載斯烏 越 *sə-se-ɔ-watu, and a toponym 斯馬 *se-ma. 
Interestingly, there are several place names in the Han section (韓伝) of Wei zhi 
that also use 斯: 速廬不斯國 *sok-lɔ-pu-se domain, 臼斯烏旦國 *gu-se-ɔ-tan 
domain, and 不斯濆邪國 *pu-se-bun-ya domain. 

This phonogram is also used in peninsular inscriptions. For example, the 
Kwangkaytho stele records a place name 粛斯舎 *sjuk-se-tsa. This graph was 
also used by the Paekche, where the epitaph of King Munyeng of Paekche 
preserves his name as: 斯麻王 King Se-ma. 

The inscription on the Inariyama tumulus sword (fifth century) has the palace 
name 斯鬼 *se-kui, which many believe to be later Sikwi. Kinmei is said to 
have resided in the Shikishima Kanasashi Palace. As Frellisvig and Whitman 
(2004) point out, this underscores that the vowel originally was lower in Japanese, 
and later vowel raising occurred, as is so prevalent in a sister language, 
Ryūkyūan: (*sema > sima, and *sekui > sikwi). This also provides evidence that 
the word sima here does not mean ‘island,’ but may be closer to the Ryūkyūan 
meaning of ‘village’ (cf. Bentley 2008:17). Interestingly, the inscription on the 
Suda Hachiman mirror contains the place name 斯麻 *se-ma. 

This phonogram is also used in the ancient Korean records as recorded in 
Nihon shoki. A small territory under the rule of Mimana is recorded in the second 
year of Kinmei as 斯二岐国 seniki. There is also the famous example of the 
Paekche word for island 斯麻, glossed in Nihon shoki as sema. This should not 
surprise us, since it has already been shown above that pre-EMC, 斯 was used 
to represent se. There are only a couple of instances of this phonogram found on 
mokkan: 猪甘部斯多布 WIKAPIBYE Sitapu (MKK 27:38), and 皮留久佐乃皮 


斯米之刀斯□ paru kusa no pazime no twosi X ‘the spring grass that (sprouts) at 
the beginning of the year…’ (MKK 31:34). 

This phonogram is one of two primary graphs used in Kojiki, the other being 
志. It is used in words such as 亦云以其追斯伎斯而號道敷大神 MATA IPAKU 
SONO OPOsikisi WO MOTITE TISIKI OPOKAMWI TO NADUKU ‘It is also said that he 
was called the Great Deity of Chishiki because he was pursured by him (Izanagi)’ 
(KG); 地矣阿多良斯登許曾我那勢之命爲如此登 TOKORO WO atarasi to koso 
WA GA nase NO MIKOTO KAKU SITURAME ‘My beloved brother has done this 
because he regretted to lose the land’ (KG). 

In the following Kojiki poem the phonogram 斯 is used six times. 

KK 57 

都藝泥布夜 tuginepu ya With peaks continuing— 

夜麻志呂賀波袁 yamasirogapa wo as I journeyed upstream 

迦波能煩理 kapa nobori on the Yamashiro River, 

和賀能煩禮婆 wa ga noboreba I journeyed upstream, 

賀波能倍迩 kapa no pe ni and there growing tall 

淤斐陀弖流 opwidateru by the edge of the river 

佐斯夫袁 sasibu wo a Sea bilberry, 

佐斯夫能紀 sasibu no kwi You, Sea bilberry tree! 

斯賀斯多迩 si ga sita ni That sacred true 

淤斐陀弖流 opwidateru camellia tree growing 

波毘呂 papiro beneath your branches 

由都麻都婆岐 yutumatubaki with its broad leaves— 

斯賀波那能 si ga pana no glowing radiant 

弖理伊麻斯 teri imasi like its blossoms, 

芝賀波能 si ga pa no being at ease 

比呂理伊麻須波 pirori imasu pa like its leaves, 

淤富岐美呂迦母 opokimiro kamo is my great lord. 

Mabuchi (1957) proposed that the compiler of Kojiki made a distinction 
between two types of [si]: 斯 (type 1) and 志 (type 2). From a Chinese 
phonological point this theory appears to have some validity: 斯 (LH sie EMC 
si) versus 志 (LH tśə EMC tɕɨ). If we ignore the fricative versus plosive 
distinction in initial position, it seems that the distinction between type one and 
type two would be the height of the vowel. However, my own research (Bentley 
1997) has shown that a careful examination of these data does not support this 
theory about OJ preserving two types of si. As a case in point, consider the 
following five words, and how each is transcribed phonetically in Kojiki 
(numbers in parentheses refer to the frequency of the word in Kojiki): 

 

sita ‘below’ sima ‘island’ sipo ‘tide’ sibi ‘tuna’ asi ‘leg’ 

斯 (8) 斯 (3) 斯 (1) 斯 (1) 斯 (1) 

志 (3) 志 (2) 志 (1) 志 (8) 志 (1) 

 

These data make it clear that these two si were interchangeable, but just to 
put the final nail in the coffin, consider the following poem from Kojiki, where 
sisi ‘boar’ is used as word play in the verse, and is represented both ways: 斯志 
and 志斯. 


KK 98 

夜須美斯志 yasumisisi Of the heavenly 

和賀意富岐美能 wa ga opokimi no eighty rays of sunshine— 

阿蘇婆志斯 aswobasisi the boar that was shot 

志斯能 sisi no by my great lord, 

夜美斯志能 yami sisi no from the terrible fear 

宇多岐加斯古美 utaki kasikwomi in the cry of the wounded boar 

和賀爾宜能煩理斯 wa ga nigenoborisi I am on a branch of the black alder 

阿理袁能 ariwo no on this open hill where 

波理能紀能延陀 pari no kwi no yeda I have climbed and fled. 

Clearly the graphs 斯 and 志 were interchangeable, and there was no 
distinction between a type A and type B si. 

This phonogram appears in Nihon shoki eight times in the annotational notes 
and 25 times in the poetry: 捶籤、此云久斯社志 “ ‘stick a comb in’ is read 
kusizasi” (NSG). 

NSK 77 

擧暮利矩能 komoriku no Mount Hatsuse 

播都制能野麼播 patuse no yama pa hidden in the folds of the land 

伊底頴智能 idetati no is a wondrous sight 

與慮斯企野麼 yorosiki yama unfolding right before my door. 

和斯里底能 wasirede no A short run from the house— 

與慮斯企夜麼能 yorosiki yama the view of the wondrous peak, 

據暮利矩能 komoriku no Mount Hatsuse, 

播都制能野麼播 patuse no yama pa hidden in the folds of the land. 

阿野儞于羅虞波斯 aya ni uragupasi Ah, what a beautiful mountain. 

阿野儞于羅虞波斯 aya ni uragupasi Ah, what a beautiful mountain. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū. The following poem uses 斯 
eight times. 

MYS 794 

大王能 OPOKIMI no As a member of 

等保乃朝廷等 topo no MIKADWO to the great lord’s far off court 

斯良農比 siranupi in the land of Tsukushi 

筑紫國尓 tukusi NO KUNI ni where the spirit cannot divine, 

泣子那須 NAKU KWO nasu I came here yearning, 

斯多比枳摩斯提 sitapi kimasite like a weeping child, 

伊企陀尓母 iki danimo without even a moment 

伊摩陀夜周米受 imada yasumezu to compose my breathing. 

年月母 TOSI TUKWI mo Though months or years 

伊摩他阿良祢婆 imada araneba have yet to pass 

許々呂由母 kokoroyu mo and without 

於母波奴阿比陀尓 omopanu apida ni any kind of warning 

宇知那毘枳 utinabiki I am listless 

許夜斯努礼 koyasinure and lay on the ground. 

伊波牟須弊 ipamu subye What can I say? 

世武須弊斯良尓 semu subye sirani I know not what to do. 

石木乎母 IPAKWI wo mo I cannot inquire 

刀比佐氣斯良受 twopisake sirazu of the trees or rocks. 


伊弊那良婆 ipye naraba If I were at home 

迦多知波阿良牟乎 katati pa aramu wo there would be proper form. 

宇良賣斯企 uramyesiki How regrettable 

伊毛乃美許等能 imwo no mikoto no my beloved— 

阿礼乎婆母 are woba mo what would you 

伊可尓世与等可 ika ni seyo to ka have me do? 

尓保鳥能 nipoDORI no Like the grebe 

布多利那良毘為 putari narabi wi we sat side by side 

加多良比斯 katarapisi and talked of things. 

許々呂曽牟企弖 kokoro somukite And going against your wishes 

伊弊社可利伊摩須 ipyezakari imasu I am here, having left home. 

 

資 


OJ: si OC: *tsi or *tsəi 

LH: tsi EMC: tsi GO: si KN: si 

NOM: tư SV: tư SK: co 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This usage appears in Paekche material 
quotesd in Nihon shoki. There is the name of a man of Paekche, 木羅斤資 
Mokura Konsi. Also, in the record of Saimei, where the failed attempt to 
recapture Paekche from the jaws of Silla is outlined, there is a variant work, 
which includes this line: 或本云、今年七月十日、大唐蘇定方、率船師、軍 
于尾資之津 ‘Another manuscript says, “On the 10th day of the seventh month 
of this year Xian Dingfang of Great Tang led a naval armada and launched an 
invasion at the Port of Bisi.” ’ 尾資 Bwisi (though it may also be Mwisi) is a 
Paekche port, but it is not clear today where it was located. 

This phonogram also appears in documents in Shōsōin where the toponym 
資母郷 Simo Village appears. This evidence is supported by a wooden 
document excavated at a dig in the Nara capital: 但馬国出石郡資母郷 Tanima 
Province IDUSI District Simo Village (MKK 19:28). There is one example of this 
graph found on a mokkan: 但馬国出石郡資母郷 Tanima Province IDSI District 
Simo Village (unnumbered tablet). 

This phonogram appears three times in the poetry of Nihon shoki. 

NSK 71 

阿摩儾霧 amadamu Flying in the sky 

箇留惋等賣 karu wotomye Princess Karu, 

異哆儺介麼 ita nakaba If you cry sorely 

臂等資利奴陪瀰 pito sirinu bemi people will find out— 

幡舎能夜摩能 pasa no yama no so like a dove 

波刀能 patwo no from Mount Hasa 

資哆儺企邇奈句 sita naki ni naku I will cry silently (for you). 

 

次 


OJ: si OC: *tshis/h 

LH: tshih, tshis EMC: tshi GO: si KN: zi 

NOM: thứ, thớ SV: thứ SK: cho 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This graph appears on several 
inscriptions from Silla. From the Chang-nyeng stele of Sin-hung, king of Silla, 


comes a personal name, 次叱智奈末 *sih-tshit-trie of the 11th rank. From the 
Tanyang border stele we find the name 比次夫智阿干支 *pi-sih-puɑ-trie of the 
sixth rank. 

An interesting example appears in Nihon shoki in what may be a Paekche 
transcription of a Japanese surname: 斯那奴次酒 Sinanwo Sisu. This surname 
likely has a connection with the province of Shinano (sinanwo 信濃国), but also 
consider that three of the eight names in the list of men in this record are 
immigrants from Paekche. Those three are Sisu, noted above, 科野新羅 
Sinanwo Sira, and 科 野 友 麻 呂 Sinanwo Tomomaro. There are several 
explanations why Paekche immigrants have what appear to be Japanese 
surnames: 1) the immigrants are descendants of Japanese who immigrated to 
Paekche, 2) simple chance that the surname is homophonous with the place name 
in Japan, or 3) the place name Shinano is originally of Paekche origin, and 
immigrants to Japan brought the place name with them. If we can trust the 
overall story in Nihon shoki, then the first choice is perhaps the best. 

The phonogram 次 appears to have been avoided in most instances for 
semantic reasons (meaning ‘next’). It appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2651 

難波人 nanipa PITO Like the people of Naniwa 

葦火燎屋之 ASIPWI TAKU YA NO who light reed fires in their homes, 

酢四手雖有 susiTE AREDO they may be covered in soot, 

己妻許増 ONOGA TUMA koso but there is no one more 

常目頬次吉 TOKO MEDURAsiki delightful than my spouse. 

Clearly the usage in the last stanza is a graphic play on words, because the 
graphs together also mean ‘eyes-cheeks, then next lucky.’ 

 

子 


OJ: si OC: *tsəʔ 

LH: tsiəʔ EMC: tsi GO: si KN: si 

NOM: tử, tí, gã SV: tử, tí SK: co 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on several Silla inscriptions. 
On the Chang-nyeng stele of King Sin-hung there is the fragment of a personal 
name: 子力智□□干□ *tsi-lik-trie (of the fifth rank?). 

This phonogram also appears in Shoki in quotes from Paekche source 
material, used to transcribe /si/. Here are a few examples from the record of 
Kinmei: 子他旱岐 Sita Kanki, 子莫古 Simakkwo, and 子言 Sigom. 

This usage also appears in documents preserved in Shōsōin, such as the name 
安子 Asi. This may appear to transcribe aKWO, but consider that the name asi also 
appears in these same documents represented both as 安志 Asi and 安字 Asi. 

The phonogram 子 was also used in Nihon shoki, in the following 
annotative note: 牡鹿此云左鳴子加 “ ‘Buck,’ in the vernacular this is sawosika” 
(NSG). 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū four times. 

MYS 3848 

荒城田乃 ARAKWIDA no Placing the rice in the storehouse 

子師田乃稲乎 sisiDA no INE wo from the newly opened paddies 

倉尓擧蔵而 KURA ni AGETE where wild game frequents— 


阿奈干稲干稲志 ana PWINEPWINEsi how it has become dry and old, 

吾戀良久者 A GA KWOPUraku PA as my yearning for you. 

 

之 


OJ: si OC: *tə 

LH: tśə EMC: tɕɨ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: chi, gì SV: chi SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. I acknowlege that it is somewhat 
difficult to determine from which orthographic writing system this graph 
originated. Because of the grammatical nature of 之 in Chinese, it may have 
been avoided as a phonogram, though evidence from Korean personal names 
quoted in Shoki lend important evidence that 之 was used as a phonogram. 
Consider this evidence from Nihon shoki regarding Paekche names: 味摩之 
Mwimasi. Mabuchi (1999:741) also includes the Paekche name 素之 Swosi, but 
this is a copyist’s mistake for 素子. 

As I consider much of the phonogrammatic material in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō 
teisetsu to be from the Suiko era, I believe the two examples of 之 in the poetry 
to be from the early seventh century. Below is one example. 

伊我留我乃 ikaruga no In Ikaruga springs water from 

止美能井乃美豆 tomi no WI no midu the fountain of Tomi. 

伊加奈久尓 ikanakuni If I had known she could not 

多義弖麻之母乃 tagete masimono live without that water, 

止美乃井能美豆 tomi no WI no midu I would have let her drink some. 

This phonogram also appears on an inscription in metal dated 658. What 
appears to be a name, 伊之沙古 isisakwo, is found in the inscription. 

The graph also appears in two names found in the Mino Census of 701: 之祁 
良売 Sikyeramye and 稲之伎売 INAsikimye. Also, on a wooden document 
excavated from the ruins of the Fujiwara Palace (fl. 694–710), three names 
appear: 刀良・安利・之比 Twora, Ari, and Sipi (MK 804). 

This phonogram is used 16 times in the annotational notes and 71 times in 
the poetry in Nihon shoki: 檮、此云柯之 “ ‘oak tree’ is read kasi” (NSG). This 
note has reference to a hill, named 甘檮丘 Amakasi Hill. While 檮 generally 
refers to a block of wood, it also could refer to a strong or hard tree, like an oak 
tree; thus, the necessity for a note. 

NSK 52 

夜莽之呂珥 yamasiro ni To Yamashiro, 

伊辭鷄苔利夜莽 isikye toriyama to Toriyama, you will go. 

伊辭鷄之鷄 isikye sikye Catch up with her! 

阿餓茂赴菟磨珥 a ga mopu tuma ni Will you catch up with 

伊辭枳阿波牟伽茂 isiki apamu kamo and see my beloved spouse? 

This phonogram is the most popular graph used to represent si in Man’yōshū, 
appearing 1937 times, consistently appearing in every book of the anthology. 

MYS 3578 

武庫能浦乃 mukwo no URA no I parted with you, my lord, 

伊里江能渚鳥 iriYE no SUDORI whom I have brooded over 

羽具久毛流 pagukumoru like the birds of the shoals 


伎美乎波奈礼弖 kimi wo panarete at the inlet to Muko Bay, 

古非尓之奴倍之 kwopwi ni sinu besi and will likely die of longing. 

 

尸 


OJ: si OC: *lhi 

LH: śi EMC: ɕi GO: si KN: si 

NOM: thi, thây SV: thi SK: si 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This phonogram appears in the earliest 
songs of the peninsula (hyangga). Both Miyake (1998) and Vovin (1999) 
demonstrate that the phonogram 尸 transcribed a lateral. Because the initial of 
this graph was a fricative-lateral, the lateral later lenited, and 尸 became a 
fricative si. In spite of this, the graph 尸 is never used to transcribe a lateral in 
the Old Japanese corpus. 

This graph is preserved in one peninsular inscription, on the Namsan stele of 
Silla, transcribing the following: 可尸利 *khɑi-śi-li or *khɑi-l-li. 

The graph 尸 appears in Shoki only twice. This phonogram clearly used as 
si appears in the following poem. 

NSK 84 

野麻登陸儞 yamatopye ni What I long to see 

瀰我保指母能婆 migaposi mono pa is the palace of Tsunosashi, 

於尸農瀰能 osinumi no this fortress built so high 

莒能陁哿紀儺屢 kono takakwi naru in Oshinumi, in the vicinity 

都奴娑之能瀰野 tunwosasi no miya of the land of Yamato. 

A more difficult to interpret representation is found in early books of Nihon 
shoki, apparently reproducing a Silla place name 曾尸茂梨, usually interpreted 
to be sosimori. The Nihon shoki editors (Ienaga et al. 1986.1:126, n. 7) suggest 
that the four-graph word is really a Silla word 徐耶伐, and means ‘the king’s 
capital.’ Kojima et al. concur with this identification (2002.1:99, n. 9). Below is a 
comparison of the OC and LH of these two words: 

 曾尸茂梨 徐耶伐 

OC *tsəŋ-lhi-məh-ri *s-la-la-bat 

LH *tsəŋ-śi-məh-li *ziɑ-ya-buɑt 

OJ sə-li-mə-li or sə-si-mə-li siə-ra-batu or siə-ya-batu 

As far as I can tell, these two words are different, but a similiarity seems to 
exist between the first two syllables of each word. It is possible that the first half 
of this word is a Japanese version of the word for gold/metal (MK swoy). 
Another possibility is that the ancient Silla word for capital was sal or səl, and 
this might be the basis for the toponym Silla. 

A wooden tablet excavated from the Heijō Palace ruins contains this 
fragment: 斤斗口小少川尸久 小□之乃 中 (unnumbered tablet), where 少川 
尸久 may represent satusiku, if 少 is an abbreviated form of 沙; however, 
there is not enough material to decipher this. 

 

師 


OJ: si OC: *sri 

LH: ṣi EMC: ʂi GO: si KN: si 

NOM: sư SV: sư SK: so 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This graph appears in the fragment of a 
name on the inscription of the Cengim Temple: 兵曹李□師 Sergeant *li X si. 

This phonogram appears in the Mino Census of 702: 恵師 Wesi. This 
phonogram appears in Kojiki, but only in surnames: SiKWI 師木 and 壱師君 
Lord Itisi. Nihon shoki also uses this graph solely in the name: 吉師 Kisi. This 
phonogram appears to not have been popular as a phonogram. 

An apparent exception to this statement is the use of the graph in Man’yōshū, 
where it appears 153 times, in almost every book of the anthology, aside from 
Books 5 and 20. What perhaps can be said is that the phonogram was popular in 
the books where semantogrammic script is predominant, attesting to the dual 
nature of the graph: phonetic si, semantic ‘director, teacher.’ 

MYS 3631 

伊都之可母 itusikamo Awa Island that I had thought 

見牟等於毛比師 MImu to omopisi I longed to see someday— 

安波之麻乎 apasima wo will I yearn for it 

与曽尓也故非無 yoso ni ya kwopwimu from afar, even though 

由久与思乎奈美 yuku yosi wo nami I have no way to get there? 

 

新 


OJ: si OC: *sin 

LH: sin EMC: sin GO: simu KN: sin 

NOM: tân, tâng SV: tân SK: sin 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the PBS, and appears several times on the 
Kwangkaytho Stele, as the following two examples attest: 新羅 *sira (later 
Silla), and 新城 *sin fortress. Regarding sira, it appears that the Japanese have 
imported the Paekche reading of sirakwi, likely from 新羅城 ‘Sira Fortress.’ 

The problem is with the reading of sil-la in Middle Korean. This reading 
suggests that perhaps 新 was sir instead of sin. As I have shown with the graph 
珍 (cf. tor-), the final nasal is a later development, and there is evidence that the 
nasal was originally a liquid. Greater research on this problem is still required, 
but I submit that there is a possibility that the 新 may have been used by the 
Paekche to transcribe sir. Naturally, the Japanese did not use this phonogram, for 
either sin or sir, to transcribe native Japanese words, because the language of Old 
Japanese did not allow closed syllables. 

Nara era documents, including Kojiki, primarily use 新 to represent the 
toponym sira. Kojiki uses two different ways to represent the name of this 
kingdom: 新羅 and 新良. The interposed reading of sirakwi is likely a Paekche 
innovation. The phonograms as are suggest simply sira. 

This phonogram also appears in the Paekche names preserved in Nihon shoki. 
A Paekche Princess appears in the record of Ōjin: 新齊都媛 Princess Sisetu. 

 

思 


OJ: si OC: *sə 

LH: siə EMC: sɨ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: tư, tứ, tơ SV: tư, tứ SK: soy 


Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the PBS. This graph is preserved twice on the Tanyang 
Silla border stele in the toponym: 勿思伐城 *mut-sɨ-buɑt fortress. 

In the Nara Capital, a wooden document was excavated, and contains the 
date 736 and the following toponyms: 但馬国気多郡思殖郷 Taniba Province, 
Keta District, Siwe Village (unnumbered tablet). 

This phonogram also appears four times in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 

NSK 79 

耶麼能謎能 yamanobye no Because people want to have 

故思麼古喩衛爾 kwosimakwo yuwe ni Maiden Koshimako 

比登涅羅賦 pito nerapu from Yamanobe, 

宇麼能耶都擬播 uma no yatugwi pa I do not even regret having 

鳴思稽矩謀那斯 wosikyeku mo nasi to pay [a fine] of eight horses. 

This graph is also used extensively in Man’yōshū, roughly 450 times, found 
in every book, but only once in Books 5 and 16. In the following poem it appears 
twice. 

MYS 3597 

和多都美能 watatumi no It seems that white caps 

於伎津之良奈美 okiTU siranami are rising and rushing in the offing 

多知久良思 tatikurasi of the sea deity. 

安麻乎等女等母 ama wotoMYEdomo I can see the diving maidens 

思麻我久流見由 simagakuru MIyu hiding in the shadow of the island. 

It is possible that this phonogram was popular because of its graphic 
etymology: a farmer thinking 心 ‘heart’ about his field 田. Thus, the heart of 
the farmer is drawn to his field. This was then extended to anything the poet’s 
heart is drawn to. 

 

四 


OJ: si OC: *sis 

LH: sis > sih EMC: sih GO: si KN: si 

NOM: tứ SV: tứ SK: so 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in Nihon shoki in the Paekche 
name 四比福夫 Sipi Pukbu. This surname is perhaps connected to a toponym 
on the peninsula: 泗沘 Sipi. 

This usage also appears in a document preserved in Shōsōin, where a 
Paekche immigrant name 四比元孫 Sipi Gwan-son appears. This same surname 
appears in Shoku Nihongi: 四比忠勇 Sipi Tiuyupu (724.5.13) and 四比河守 
Sipi KAPAMORI (766.3.17). 

This phonogram also is used 141 times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 4225 

足日木之 ASIPIKWI NO You will be crossing 

山黄葉尓 YAMA NO MOMIDI ni over the mountain road 

四頭久相而 siduku APITE where our legs get tired, 

将落山道乎 TIRAMU YAMADI wo with the autumn leaves falling, 

公之超麻久 KIMI GA KWOYEmaku mixed in with the water droplets. 

 


司 


OJ: si OC: *sə 

LH: siə EMC: sɨ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: ti, tư, tơ SV: ti, tư SK: so 

Usage / History: 

The evidence is quite slim, but on what evidence there is, I believe this 
phonogram belongs to the PBS. Available evidence comes from such Paekche 
surnames as Siba 司馬, or Susi 州司 (on the Cengim Temple inscription). This 
graph appears in Nihon shoki in the surname Siba. Mori (1991:207) also believes 
司 appears in one poem (NSK 75), but I adhere to the textual analysis of Ienaga 
et a1. (1986.1:650). According to Mori, NSK 75 has three examples of 伺 and 
one of 司. An analysis of the various manuscripts show that all manuscripts have 
伺 other than the Maeda and Kunaichō texts. I thus believe that NSK 75 
originally had 伺 four times. 司 was never there. 

The phonogram 司 also appears in Man’yōshū, but only in the name 司馬 
Siba. 

 

志 


OJ: si OC: *təh 

LH: tśəh EMC: tɕɨ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: chí SV: chí SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It appears a number of times in Jōgū 
shōtoku hōō teisetsu, in names like 伊志支那郎女 Isikina IRATUMYE or 伊止 
志古王 Prince Itosikwo. Perhaps more importantly is the transcription of 
Suiko’s name: 止余美気加志支夜比売天皇 Toyo Mike kasikiya Pimye. The 
addition of the title 天皇 ‘heavenly sovereign’ is clearly a later interpolation, 
and should not reflect poorly on the archaic phonograms used to represent her 
name. Compare how her name is also represented in Kojiki and Nihon shoki: 

 

Teisetsu Kojiki Nihon shoki 

止余美気加志支夜比売 豐御食炊屋比賣 豐御食炊屋姫 

 

Both Kojiki and Nihon shoki use logorams for the majority of her name, with 
Kojiki electing to phonetically represent pimye 比賣, with Shoki opting for a 
complete logographic representation. So while Jōgū teisetsu may have been 
compiled at a much later date, it is clear the basic material preserves an older 
tradition. 

This phonogram also appears in a poem preserved in Jōgū teisetsu: 

美加弥乎須 mikami wosu Mount Tabasami 

多婆佐美夜麻乃 tabasami yama no that rules from above; 

阿遅加気尓 adikake ni alas, I stood there 

比止乃麻乎之志 pito no mawosisi in the shade of the aji, 

和何於保支美波母 wa ga opokimi pamo begging our master’s return. 

This phonogram appears in the liturgies: 八束穂能伊加志穂爾、皇神等能 
依左志奉者 YATUKAPO no ikasi PO ni, SUMEGAMWITATI no yosasiMATURABA “If 
we present the long rice, eight-hands long of fine rice according to the command 
of the imperial deitieis…” (NT 1). This phonogram also appears on a variety of 
mokkan: 志加麻評 Sikama District (MK 194), 之比等等々流刀毛意夜志己々 


呂曽 sipito to toru twomo iyasi kokoro so ‘Even if I take (him as) my father-inlaw, 
such base feelings…’ (MK 174), and 伊止志 Itosi (MK 1007). 

This phonogram is also used in Kojiki, as in the name of the deity, 志那都比 
古神 sinatupikwo Shinatsuhiko (KG), and in the clause 志多多爾母 sita dani 
mo ‘even if he comes stealthily’ (KG). It also appears in a number of the poems 
in Kojiki. 

KK 92 

美母呂能 mimoro no The trunk of the sacred oak tree 

伊都加斯賀母登 itukasiga moto growing in Mimoro— 

賀斯賀母登 kasi ga moto like the trunk of that oak tree 

由由斯伎加母 yuyusiki kamo what trepidation she inspires, 

加志波良袁登賣 kasipara wotomye the maiden of Kashiwara. 

The phonogram 志 is used frequently in Nihon shoki, appearing 12 times in 
the annotational notes and 52 times in the poetry: 醜女、此云志許賣 “ ‘ugly 
woman’ is read sikomye” (NSG). 

NSK 101 

柯羅倶爾能 kara kuni no Standing upon the walls 

基能陪儞陀々志 kwi no pe ni tatasi of the Kara Fortress 

於譜磨故幡 opobakwo pa I can see 

比禮甫羅須彌喩 pire purasu miyu Ōbako waving her scarf 

那儞婆陸武岐底 nanipa pye mukite in the direction of Naniwa. 

For a discussion about Mabuchi’s theory (1957) that Kojiki used 志 and 斯 
to transcribe two different types of /si/, see the discussion under 斯 OJ: si. 

The phonogram 志 is used quite frequently in Man’yōshū, though not as 
often as 之. It appears about 298 times in the anthology. 

MYS 183 

吾御門 WA GA MIKADWO How sad am I 

千代常登婆尓 TIYO TOKOtoba ni who believed that 

将榮等 SAKAYEMU to my prince’s palace 

念而有之 OMOPITE ARIsi would prosper for a thousand reigns, 

吾志悲毛 WARE si KANASI mo would prosper forever. 

 

紫 


OJ: si OC: *tseʔ 

LH: tsieʔ EMC: tsia GO: si KN: si 

NOM: tử, tía SV: tử SK: co 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The graph 紫 is rarely used in Old 
Japanese records, other than to fairly consistently transcribe the place name 
Tukusi 筑紫. Kojiki consistently represents the name with 紫, as does Nihon 
shoki. Kojiki also preserves a variant rendition, 竺紫, but the final graph is the 
same. A few mokkan also have 筑紫 for Tukusi (MK 3068). 

One other example of 紫 appears as a phonograms in Nihon shoki, in the 
personal name 巨勢臣紫壇 Kose OMI Sitanwo. The same name is written 
differently in the 14th year of Tenmu 許勢朝臣辛壇努 Kose ASOMI Sitanwo. 
Also notice that in Shoku Nihongi his name is 志丹 Sitano (717.1.18). There are 
28 examples of 紫 used phonetically in Man’yōshū, but all are found in the 


toponym Tukusi. An example where the name is written out mora by mora is 
below. 

MYS 866 

波漏々々尓 parwoparo ni How I think of 

於忘方由流可母 omopoyuru kamo this distant place. 

志良久毛能 sirakumwo ni White clouds piled up 

知弊仁邊多天留 tipye ni pyedateru a thousand times separate 

都久紫能君仁波 tukusi no kuni pa the land of Tsukushi. 

The final stanza appears to have been created using specific phonograms for 
a visual effect. If we look at the graphs semantically, the final stanza reads: 
capital-far-purple-of-lord-benevolence-waves. The phonogram 紫 was likely 
chosen to remind the reader of the traditional way that Tukusi was written 筑紫, 
while 能 and 波 simply function as particles. 

One problematic poem that appears to use 紫 needs to be addressed. The 
authorial text for Man’yō studies, the Nishi Honganji-bon, perserves poem MYS 
2859 thus: 

飛鳥川 ASUKAGAPA The Asuka River— 

高川避紫 TAKAKAPA YOKAsi I have come crossing it, 

越来 KWOYEKOSI WO avoiding where the water is high. 

信今夜 MAKOTO KOYOPI PA Truly tonight will you come back 

不明行哉 AKEZU YUKAME YA before the dawn breaks? 

However, there are no readings attached to this poem in the older 
manuscripts. Omodaka notes that the Zōteihon Shinkō mentions that some 
manuscritps have the second stanza written differently, as 南川柴避 and read 
nadusapi. Omodaka rejects the idea that this is the archetype (1983, 12:30). The 
latest scholarly text of Man’yōshū, Shin Nihon koten bungaku taikei follows the 
Shinkō text’s theory of corruption, and presents the poem as follows: 

飛鳥川 ASUKAGAPA The Asuka River— 

奈川柴避越 nadusapi WATARI As I have come here, 

来 KOSI MONO WO crossing the river with difficulty, 

信今夜 MAKOTO KOYOPI PA surely it would be nice if 

不明行哉 AKEZU MO IKANU KA tonight would not end. 

As it is difficult to know which is correct, I have elected to note both 
possibilities, one with 紫 , and one without, where it appears that 柴 
‘brushwood’ has been corrupted into 紫. 

 

芝 


OJ: si OC: *tə 

LH: tśiə EMC: tɕɨ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: NA SV: chi SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. This is based on the record of Suiko in 
Nihon shoki. There a man from Paekche comes to Japan and is about to be 
banished to an island because of a skin disease, but he convinces the court he has 
a skill they can take advantage of. The record says “He was also called 芝耆摩 
呂 Siki Maro,” which does not sound like a Paekche name, but one perhaps 
given to him. 

This phonogram is also used once in a poem in Kojiki. 


KK 57 

佐斯夫能紀 sasibu no kwi You, Sea bilberry tree! 

斯賀斯多迩 si ga sita ni That sacred true 

淤斐陀弖流 opwidateru camellia tree growing 

波毘呂 papiro beneath your branches 

由都麻都婆岐 yutumatubaki with its broad leaves— 

斯賀波那能 si ga pana no glowing radiant 

弖理伊麻斯 teriimasi like its blossoms, 

芝賀波能 si ga pa no being at ease 

比呂理伊麻須波 piroriimasu pa like its leaves, 

淤富岐美呂迦母 opokimiro kamo is my great lord. 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, once in the annotational notes, 
and once in the poetry: 小竹、此云芝努 “ ‘Small bamboo’ is read sinwo” 
(NSG). 

NSK 33 

許能彌企能 kono miki no It is strange 

阿椰珥 aya ni how very 

于多娜濃芝 utadanwosi delightful this wine is. 

作沙 sa sa Drink! Drink! 

Jidai betsu kokugo jiten claims this phonogram is also used to transcribe si in 
Man’yōshū (1967:894), but I have not been able to locate a single poem that 
includes it. 

 

詩 


OJ: si OC: *lhə 

LH: śə EMC: ɕɨ GO: si KN:si 

NOM: thi, thơ SV: thi SK: si 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears twice in the annotational 
notes and once in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 可美真手此云于魔詩莽耐 “ ‘(The 
name) Umashimade’ is read umasimade” (NSG). 

NSK 11 

愛瀰詩烏 emisi wo The barbarian 

毘儾利 pidari having been insulted— 

毛々那比苔 mwomwo napi to though people say 

比苔破易陪廼毛 pito pa ipedomo they have seen a 100 battles 

多牟伽毘毛勢儒 tamukapi mo sezu these do not even resist. 

This phonogram appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3885 

吾角者 A GA TUNWO PA My antlers 

御笠乃波夜詩 MIKASA no payasi are decorations for his hat. 

 

旨 


OJ: si OC: *kiʔ 

LH: kiʔ > tśiʔ EMC: tɕi GO: si KN: si 

NOM: chỉ SV: chỉ SK: ci 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, appearing once in the annotational notes, 
and three times in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 柱、此云美簸旨邏 “ ‘pillar’ is 
read mipasira” (NSG). 

NSK 80 

婀拕羅斯枳 atarsiki Such a pitiful waste, 

偉儺謎能陀倶彌 winabye no tagumi that inking string used by 

柯該志須彌儺皤 kakesi suminapa the Inabe carpenter. 

旨我那稽麼 si ga nakyeba If he is no longer here, 

拕例柯々該武預 tare ka kakemu yo what skilled person will remain 

婀拕羅須彌儺皤 atara suminapa to use the inking string? 

This phonogram also appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 159 

明日毛鴨 ASU mo KAMO Perhaps it will be tomorrow 

召賜萬旨 MESITAMAPAmasi that he will gaze up 

其山乎 SONO YAMA wo at that mountain, 

振放見乍 PURISAKE MITUTU while he watches from afar. 

暮去者 YUPU SAREBA And when evening comes 

綾哀 AYA NI KANASIMI he will be helplessly sad. 

明来者 AKE KUREBA And when dawn breaks 

裏佐備晩 URAsabwi KURASI he will spend his time in loneliness. 

荒妙乃 ARATAPE no The sleeves of his robe 

衣之袖者 KOROMO NO SWODE PA made of rough hemp 

乾時文無 PURU TOKI mo NASI will not have time to dry. 

 

寺 


OJ: si, zi OC: *s-ləh 

LH: ziəh EMC: zɨ LMC: sɦʑ GO: zi KN: si 

NOM: chùa SV: tự SK: so, si 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS when representing zi, but to the CBS to 
represent si. There is only one example of this phonogram used to represent zi, 
and that appears in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 2928 

各寺師 ONOGAzisi It appears that people 

人死為良思 PITO SINISUrasi die each in their own way. 

妹尓戀 IMWO ni KWOPWI I have grown thinner day by day 

日異羸沼 PI NI KE NI YASEnu longing for my beloved— 

人丹不所知 PITO NI SIRAEZU without her ever knowing it. 

There is only one example of this phonogram in Nihon shoki, in what is 
perhaps a phonetic representation of an Ainu word: 伊寺水門 the port of Isi. 
There is also only one example of this phonogram for si in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3225 

吉畫矢寺 YOSIWE YAsi That is no problem, 

礒者無友 ISWO PA NAKU TOMO though it has no beach. 

奥津浪 OKITUNAMI Row and push through 

諍榜入来 SINWOGI KOGI IRIKO the waves in the offing, 

白水郎之釣船 AMA NO TURIBUNE you boats of the fisher people. 


指 


OJ: si OC: *kiʔ 

LH: kiʔ > tśiʔ EMC: tɕi LMC: tʂi GO: si KN: si 

NOM: chỉ, chỏ, xỉ SV: trỉ, chỉ SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the LJS. It appears once in the poetry of Nihon shoki. 

NSK 84 

野麻登陸儞 yamatopye ni What I long to see 

瀰我保指母能婆 migaposi mono pa is the palace of Tsunosashi, 

於尸農瀰能 osinumi no this fortress built so high 

莒能陀哿紀儺屢 kono takakwi naru in Oshinumi, in the vicinity 

都奴娑之能瀰野 tunwosasi no miya of the province of Yamato. 

This phonogram also appears in nine poems in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3627 

安佐散礼婆 asa sareba By the beach of Mitsu which 

伊毛我手尓麻久 imwo ga TE ni maku name reminds me of my beloved 

可我美奈須 kagami nasu who wraps her hand around a mirror 

美津能波麻備尓 mitu no pamabwi ni when morning comes 

於保夫祢尓 opobune ni with numerous oars sticking out 

真可治之自奴伎 makadi sizinuki of the great ship 

可良久尓々 kara kuni ni headed toward Minume— 

和多理由加武等 watari yukamu to we suppose we will cross the sea 

多太牟可布 tadamukapu straight for the land of Kara. 

美奴面乎左指天 minumye wo sasite Waiting for the tide 

之保麻知弖 sipo matite and following the course of the sea 

美乎妣伎由氣婆 miwobiki yukeba the waves in the offing 

於伎敝尓波 okipye nipa are white capped in height. 

This poem uses a number of graph-sets to provide subliminal Chineseinduced 
ideas. Notice that 之 is used 11 times to represent si, but for sirusi 
‘momento,’ written as 之留思 ‘this-detain-thoughts.’ The verb here is 左指天 
sasite ‘to point to, head toward.’ The phonogram 指 sasu means point, so the 
poet has selected this graph to do double duty, phonologically and semantically. 

 

死 


OJ: si OC: *siʔ 

LH: siʔ EMC: si GO: si KN: si 

NOM: tử SV: tử SK: so 

Usage / History: 

I tentatively place this phonogram in the LJS. This phonogram was generally 
avoided because of the semantics, ‘death, to die.’ This usage only appears once in 
Man’yōshū. 

MYS 86 

如此許 KAKU BAKARI If I am to have such longing 

戀乍不有者 KWOPWITUTU ARAZU PA thoughts of you, like this, 

高山之 TAKAYAMA NO it would be better if I made 

磐根四巻手 IPANE siMAKITE my pillow among the rocks of 

死奈麻死物呼 sinamasi MONO wo a high mountain and died there. 

Here it can be argued that the graph 死 is used in a dual role, as a 
semantogram, and a phonogram. 


此 


OJ: si OC: *tshəʔ 

LH: tshieʔ EMC: tshiə GO: si KN: si 

NOM: thử SV: thử SK: cho 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears six times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3939 

佐刀知加久 satwo tikaku How I hate myself 

伎美我奈里那婆 kimi ga narinaba for the unfounded thought 

古非米也等 kwopwime ya to that my longing for you 

母登奈於毛比此 motona omopisi would subside if you 

安連曽久夜思伎 are so kuyasiki were to return closer to home. 

It also appears once in Harima fudoki, in the name 意此川 Osi River. 

 

時 


OJ: si OC: *də 

LH: dźə EMC: dʑɨ LMC: ʂɦi GO: zi KN: si 

NOM: thì, thời SV: thì, thời SK: si 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the CBS. It appears twice in the annotational notes, 
and once in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 排別此云飫時和句 “ ‘Move and split’ is 
read osiwaku” (NSG). 

NSK 10 

伊莽波豫 ima pa yo We have now won! 

伊莽波豫 ima pa yo For now we have won! 

阿々時夜塢 aa si ya wo Fools! Serves you right! 

伊莽儾而毛 imada ni mo Have they had enough, 

阿誤豫 ago yo you, my troops? 

伊莽儾而毛 imada ni mo Have they had enough, 

阿誤豫 agwo yo you, my lads? 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, but only twice. 

MYS 4206 

之夫多尓乎 sibutani wo Along this beach 

指而吾行 SASITE WA GA YUKU we travel headed for Shibutani. 

此濱尓 KONO PAMA ni Let us gaze at 

月夜安伎氐牟 TUKWIYWO akitemu the moon until we tire of it. 

馬之末時停息 UMA simasi TOME Stop the horses here for a while. 

 

偲 


OJ: si OC: *sə 

LH: siə EMC: sɨ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: NA SV: tư, ty SK: soy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears but once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3992 

布勢能宇美能 puse no umi no Continue to see me 

意枳都之良奈美 okitu siranami like the incoming white cap waves 

安利我欲比 arigaywopi from the offing of the sea of Fuse— 

伊夜登偲能波尓 iya tosi no pa ni we should appreciate 

見都追思努播牟 MItutu sinwopamu this scene year after year. 


Notice how the poet has selected the graphs 登偲 ‘longing climbs’ for tosi 
‘year’ and has 思 ‘think, long for’ to represent 思努播牟 sinwopamu ‘long for, 
appreciate.’ 

 

信 


OJ: si, sina OC: *sin 

LH: sinh EMC: sin GO: simu KN: sin 

NOM: tín, tin SV: tín SK: sin 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belonsg to the LJS. The use of this phonogram to represent 
si appears in Hitachi fudoki in the toponyms 信太郡 Sita District and 信筑川 
Siduku River. In Harima fudoki the word 信深貝 Sizimi KAPI ‘corbicula shell’ 
appears. In all three cases the consonant after 信 is prenasalized, suggesting that 
the underlying form is *sinC-, where C represents the consonant of the second 
syllable. One other important example is found in Shoku Nihongi, with 大伴宿 
祢祜信備 OPOTOMO Sukune Kosibwi (737.9.28). A different example is what 
appears to be a representation of the name of the Island of Ishigaki 信覺 
Singaku (714.12.5). 

There are very few examples of this graph representing sina. The most well 
known example is the province Shinan. 信濃 Sinanwo. This toponym is found 
in Nihon shoki, Shoku Nihongi, and Man’yōshū. Two other examples are a name 
信紗 Sinasa (714.11.4), and the toponym 麑嶋信尓村 KAGOSIMA Sinani 
Village (764.12). 

 

詞 


OJ: si OC: *s-lə 

LH: ziə EMC: zɨ LMC: sɦʑ GO: zi KN: si 

NOM: từ SV: từ SK: so 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3627 

左欲布氣弖 saywo pukete As the night wears on 

由久敝乎之良尓 yukupye wo sirani we lose our sense of direction 

安我己許呂 a ga kokoro so we stop the ship 

安可志能宇良尓 akasi no ura ni at the bay of Akashi 

布祢等米弖 pune tomete which brightens my heart, 

宇伎祢乎詞都追 ukine wo situtu and while we sleep on the water 

和多都美能 watatumi no when I look out at the offing 

於枳敝乎見礼婆 okipye wo mireba of the sea deity 

伊射理須流 izarisuru the fisher maidens 

安麻能乎等女波 ama no wotoMYE pa about to go fishing 

小船乗 WOBUNE NORI get in their small boats 

都良々尓宇家里 turara ni ukyeri and float on the water in a line. 

 

嗣 


OJ: si OC: *s-ləh 

LH: ziəh EMC: zɨ LMC: sɦʑ GO: zi KN: si 

NOM: tự SV: tự SK: so 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears five times in Nihon shoki, all 
in the same poem. 

NSK 3 

阿磨佐箇屢 amasakaru Having crossed over 

避奈菟謎廼 pinatu mye no the narrow, earthly straits, 

以和多邏素西渡 iwatarasu setwo the provincial maidens 

以嗣箇播箇柁輔智 isikapa kataputi stand on the banks of the river, 

箇多輔智爾 kataputi ni on the banks of the Ishikawa, 

阿彌播利和柁嗣 ami pariwatasi spreading out their nets. 

妹慮豫嗣爾 mero yosi ni Pull in those nets 

豫嗣豫利據禰 yosi yorikone by pulling on the meshes! 

以嗣箇播箇柁輔智 isikapa kataputi On the banks for the Ishikawa. 

 

辭 


OJ: si OC: *s-lə 

LH: ziə EMC: zɨ LMC: sɦʑ GO: zi KN: si 

NOM: từ SV: từ SK: so 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears three times in the annotative 
notes, and 48 times in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 椎、此云辭毘, “ ‘pasania tree’ 
is read sipi” (NSG). This note is important because 椎 often refers to wooden 
mallets, so the annotative note alerts the reader to read the graph as a kind of tree. 

NSK 55 

揶莽辭呂能 yamasiro no When I behold 

菟々紀能瀰揶珥 tutukwi no miya ni my brother, sent to relay 

茂能莽烏輸 mono mawosu a message to this, 

和餓齊烏瀰例麼 wa ga se wo mireba the Palace of Tsutsuki in Yamashiro, 

那瀰多遇摩辭茂 namitagumasi mo anguish moves me to tears. 

 

試 


OJ: si OC: *lhəkh 

LH: śəh EMC: ɕɨ LMC: ʂi GO: si KN: si 

NOM: thí. thử, thía SV: thí SK: si 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, appearing only once in the poetry of 
Nihon shoki. 

NSK 22 

夜摩苔波 yamato pa Yamato is 

區珥能摩倍邏摩 kuni no maporama the most prosperous— 

多々儺豆久 tatanaduku a land ringed by 

阿烏伽枳 awokaki mountains arrayed 

夜摩許莽例屢 yama komoreru as a green, rolling fence. 

夜摩苔之于屢破試 yamato no urupasi Yes, Yamato is beautiful. 

 

璽 


OJ: si OC: *sneʔ 

LH: sieʔ EMC: siə LMC: sʑ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: NA SV: tỉ SK: so 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This graph appears in two annotative 
notes in Nihon shoki: 重播種子、此云璽枳磨枳 “ ‘Planting seed where seed 
had already been planted’ is known as siki maki” (NSG), Also, 柴、此云府璽 
“ ‘Brushwood’ is called pusi” (NSG). 

 

始 


OJ: si OC: *lhəʔ 

LH: śəʔ EMC: ɕɨ LMC: ʂi GO: si KN: si 

NOM: thỉ, thuỷ SV: thỉ, thi, thuỷ SK: si 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, appearing once in the annotative notes, 
and 18 times in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 葉、此云箇始婆 “ ‘Leaf’ is called 
kasipa” (NSG). 

NSK 49 

那菟務始能 natumusi no It is never good 

譬務始能虚呂望 pimusi no koromo for the larva of 

赴多幣耆氐 putapye kite the summer moth 

介區瀰夜儾利破 kakumi yadari pa to wrap itself in robes 

阿珥豫區望阿羅儒 ani yoku mo arazu of two different cocoons. 

 

伺 


OJ: si OC: *sə(h) 

LH: siə(h) EMC: sɨ LMC: sʑ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: NA SV: tư, tứ SK: so 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the CBS, used three times in the poetry of Nihon shoki. 
All three examples appear in the same poem. 

NSK 75 

野麼等能 yamato no On the peaks 

嗚武羅能陀該儞 womura no take ni of the mountains of Yamato, 

之々符須登 sisi pusu to who shall venture forth 

拕例柯 tare ka to stand before 

擧能居登 kono koto the great one and tell him 

飫裒磨陛儞麻嗚須 opomapye ni mawosu where the beast lays waiting? 

飫裒枳瀰簸 opokimi pa The great lord 

賊據嗚枳舸斯題 soko wo kikasite overhears these words, 

柁磨々枳能 tamamaki no takes his jeweled 

阿娯羅儞陀々伺 agura ni tatasi dais and sits upon it. 

施都魔枳能 situmaki no He takes the dais 

阿娯羅儞陀々伺 agura ni tatasi of cloth and sits upon it. 

A note says that in place of tatasi, another manuscript has 伊麻伺 imasi 
“sitting (on the throne).” 

 

自 


OJ: si OC: *dzih 

LH: dzih EMC: dzi LMC: tsɦʑ GO: zi KN: si 

NOM: tự, từ SV: tự SK: co 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. As Ōno (1962:597) has pointed out, 
this usage also survives in a fragment of what appears to be a draft of an imperial 
edict from Kōken: 天下者所知物尓在自止奈母 AME [NO] SITA PA SIROSIMESU 
MONO ni ARUrasi to namo ‘(We think) that everything under heavenly can be 
governed....’ 

This usage also appears in the imperial edicts. The following quote from an 
edict contains this phonogram three times to represent si: 別宮尓御坐坐牟時自 
加得言也。此波朕劣尓依弖之加久言良之止念召波愧自弥伊等保自弥奈母念須。 
KOTO MIYA ni OPOMASIMASAmu TOKI sika E IPAME ya. KO pa WA GA ODINAKI ni 
YORItesi kaku IPUrasi to OMOPOSIMESEba PADUKAsimi itoposimi namo OMOPOsu 
‘If only I had been residing in a separate palace then would I have been able to 
say this. Rather this is because I was foolish, and I think it is unbearable and I 
should be ashamed that it appears that I am talking like this’ (SM 27). 

 

施 


OJ: si OC: *lhai 

LH: śɑi EMC: ɕiə LMC: ʂi GO: se KN: si 

NOM: thí, thia, the, thè SV: thi, thí SK: si 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS.This phonogram appears once in the 
poetry of Nihon shoki. 

NSK 126 

美曳之弩能 miyesinwo no The trout of Eshino 

曳之弩能阿喩 yesinwo no ayu beautiful Mieshino— 

阿喩擧曾播 ayu koso pa it is good for 

施麻倍母曳岐 simape mo yeki you trout to be near the island. 

愛倶流之衞 ekurusiwe Ah, how painful 

奈疑能母騰 nagwi no moto to be under the water-greens 

制利能母騰 seri no moto to be under the water-cress. 

阿例播倶流之衞 are pa kurusiwe I am in pain. 

For an earlier usage of 施 from the Paekche orthography system, see the 
same graph under se. 

 

絁 


OJ: si OC: *lhai 

LH: śɑi EMC: ɕiə LMC: ʂi GO: si KN: si 

NOM: NA SV: the SK: si 

Usage / History: 

The phonogram belongs to the CBS. This usage appears eight times in the 
poetry of Nihon shoki. 

NSK 96 

野絁磨倶儞 yasima kuni I searched the eight islands 

都磨々祁哿泥底 tuma makikanete but could not find a spouse. 

播屢比能 parupi no Under the spring sun 

哿須我能倶儞々 kasuga no kuni ni in the land of Kasuga 

倶波絁謎嗚 kupasi mye wo I had heard that 

阿利等枳々底 ari to kikite there was a beautiful maiden. 


與慮志謎嗚 yorosi mye wo I had heart that 

阿利等枳々底 ari to kikite there was a proper woman. 

莽紀佐倶 makwi saku A fine grain of wood, 

避能伊陀圖嗚 pi no itatwo wo I pushed opened that door 

飫斯毘羅枳 osipiraki made of Japanese cypress. 

倭例以梨魔志 ware irimasi I went inside 

阿都圖唎 atwo twori and held her leg, 

都麼怒唎絁底 tumadworisite holding the edge of her hem, 

魔倶囉圖唎 makura twori holding her pillow— 

伊慕我堤嗚 imo ga te wo holding my spouse. 

倭例儞魔柯斯毎 ware ni makasime I wrapped her hand 

倭我堤嗚麼 wa ga te woba around my waist 

伊慕儞魔柯絁毎 imo ni makasime and she my arm— 

麼左棄逗囉 masakwidura wrapped it around her. 

多々企阿藏播梨 tataki azapari And like a vine, 

矢洎矩矢慮 sisikusiro we caressed, intertwined. 

于魔伊禰矢度儞 umai nesi two ni We slept deeply, 

儞播都等唎 nipatu tori sweet like meat on a skewer. 

柯稽播儺倶儺梨 kakye pa nakunari The fowl I keep 

奴都等利 nwotu tori have begun to cackle. 

枳蟻矢播等余武 kigisi pa toyomu And in the fields 

婆絁稽矩謨 pasikyeku mo the pheasants add their call. 

伊麻娜以播孺底 imada ipazute The dawn has already come 

阿開儞啓梨 akenikyeri before I have been able 

倭蟻慕 wagimo to confess my feelings, my love. 

 

茲 


OJ: si OC: *dzə 

LH: dziə EMC: tsɨ LMC: tsz̩ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: NA SV: ti, tư SK: co 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. There are only two examples of this 
phonogram in Nihon shoki, both in annotative notes: 抜本截末、此云謀登岐利 
須衛於茲波羅比 “ ‘Cut the base, and strip off the branches’ is read moto kiri 
suwe osiparapi” (NSG), and 鮪此云茲寐 “Tuna (Shibi, a personal name) is 
read sibi” (NSG). 

 

矢 


OJ: si OC: *lhiʔ 

LH: śiʔ EMC: ɕi LMC: ʂi GO: si KN:si 

NOM: thỉ, thẻ SV: thỉ SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This is a phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears eight times in the 
poetry of Nihon shoki. 

NSK 97 

倭我彌細麼 wa ga miseba When I gaze down 

都奴娑播符 tunwo sapapu on Iware Pond 

以簸例能伊開能 ipare no ike no with rocks covered in vines 

美那矢駄府 minasitapu even the fish under the water 


紆鳴謨 uwo mo come to the surface 

紆陪儞堤堤那皚矩 upe ni dete nageku and lament your parting. 

野須美矢々 yasumisisi And like the sash 

倭我於朋枳美能 wa ga opokimi worn by my great lord 

於魔細屢 obaseru who rules over all 

娑佐羅能美於寐能 sasara no miobi no with its dainty design, 

武須彌陀例 musubitare who is there that 

駄例夜矢比等母 dare yasi pito mo will not come out 

紆陪儞泥堤那皚矩 upe ni dete nageku and lament your parting? 

 

洎 


OJ: si OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: ɡi LMC: kɦi GO: ki KN: ki 

NOM: NA SV: kị SK: kuy, key 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. What is interesting is that looking at 
this graph from the point of phonology, it should not belong here. Marc Miyake 
has suggested to me that the simplest answer is that the poet or scribe misused 
this phonogram based on the phonology of 自 (Miyake, pc). This position is 
strengthened by the fact that this phonogram only appears once in Nihon shoki, in 
the following poem. 

NSK 96 

多々企阿藏播梨 tataki azapari And like a vine, 

矢洎矩矢慮 sisikusiro we caressed, intertwined. 

于魔伊禰矢度儞 umai nesi two ni We slept deeply, 

儞播都等唎 nipatu tori sweet like meat on a skewer. 

柯稽播儺倶儺梨 kakye pa nakunari The fowl I keep 

奴都等利 nwotu tori have begun to cackle. 

枳蟻矢播等余武 kigisi pa toyomu And in the fields 

婆絁稽矩謨 pasikyeku mo the pheasants add their call. 

伊麻娜以播孺底 imada ipazute The dawn has already come 

阿開儞啓梨 akenikyeri before I have been able 

倭蟻慕 wagimo to confess my feelings, my love. 

Another possibility is that this phonogram originated from graphic corruption 
during transmission of the manuscripts: 自 > 洎, but I find this explanation less 
persuasive. 

 

爲 


OJ: si OC: *wai 

LH: wɑi EMC: wiə GO: wi KN: wi 

NOM: ví, vì, vị, vờ, vay SV: vi, vị SK: wuy 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests OJ si ‘doing’ to the reader. This usage appears in 
Nihon shoki, in the record of Ninken: 大脚更名大爲, “His name was OPOSI 
‘Great Leg,’ also known as OPOSI ‘Great Action’ ” (NSG). Ienaga et al. 
(1986.1:526) wish to read 大爲 as Ōsu (OPOSU), but consider that Ninken’s 
name is also recorded in the record of Kenzō as 大石, glossed as OPOSI ‘Great 
Stone.’ 

This is one of the most popular kunganas in Man’yōshū for si. 


MYS 109 

大船之 OPOBUNE NO What likely will become clear 

津守之占尓 TUMORI GA URA ni from the fortune told by Tsumori, 

将告登波 NORAMU to pa a name calling to mind a great ship, 

益爲久知而 MASASIku SIRITE is something truly I already knew: 

我二人宿之 WA GA PUTARI NEsi the two of us have slept together. 

 

磯 


OJ: si OC: *kəi 

LH: kɨi EMC: kɨj GO: ke KN: ki 

NOM: cơ SV: cơ SK: kuy 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ isi ‘rock’ or ‘rocky beach.’ In the 
record of Jinmu in Nihon shoki we find the following: 兄磯城 a name read 
ESIKWI. This must have been a rather counter-intuitive reading, as after this 
name appears we find the following annotational note: 磯、此云志 “The graph 
磯 is to be read si” (NSG). All Other examples are the same: SIKWI. 

This usage also quite popular in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 7 

金野乃 AKI NO NWO no I recall that temporary hut 

美草苅葺 miKUSA KARIPUKI where we spent one night 

屋杼礼里之 YAdorerisi in the capital at Uji 

兎道乃宮子能 uDI no MIYAKWO no which was thatched with grass 

借五百礒所念 KARI IPO SI OMOPOYU from the golden fields. 

 

羊蹄 



OJ: si OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: NA GO: NA KN: NA 

NOM: NA SV: NA SK: NA 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, where 羊蹄 ‘Japanese dock’ suggests to the reader OJ si. 
In Nihon shoki, there is a quote from an Ainu individual that includes the phrase 
後方羊蹄 with a note: 此云斯梨蔽之 “This is read siripyesi.” It is possible this 
is a transcription of the Ainu word siripet < *siripetsu ‘great river.’ 

This usage also appears twice in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1857 

毎年 TOSI NO PA NI Even though the plum 

梅者開友 UME PA SAKEDOMO blooms every year, 

空蝉之 UTUSEMI NO spring does not come for me, 

世人吾羊蹄 YO NO PITO WARE SI this person in the world 

春無有来 PARU NAKARIKYERI of visible subjects. 

 

鍾 



OJ: sigu OC: *toŋ 

LH: tśoŋ EMC: tɕuawŋ LMC: tʂywŋ GO: syuu KN: sio 

NOM: chuông SV: chung SK: chwong 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears twice in Man’yōshū, each 
time representing 鍾禮 sigure ‘cold drizzle (rain)’ (MYS 3213, 3223). 

 


鐘 


OJ: sigu OC: *toŋ 

LH: tśoŋ EMC: tɕuawŋ LMC: tʂywŋ GO: syuu KN: sio 

NOM: chuông SV: chung SK: chwong 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This usage only appears in Man’yōshū, 
used 11 times exclusively to represent 鐘禮 sigure ‘cold drizzle (rain)’ (MYS 
1551, 1553, 1571, 1583, et seq.). 

 

餝 


OJ: sika OC: *lhək 

LH: śɨk EMC: ɕik GO: siki KN: sioku 

NOM: sức SV: sức SK: sik 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage appears in Harima fudoki, in 
the toponym 餝磨郡 Sikama District. The legendary explanation for the naming 
of the district in Harima fudoki claims it was named after the ruler heard a deer 
(sika) calling out (naku). In the Yōrō Census (721) the toponym 葛餝郡 
Katusika District appears. This same district name appears in a head note in 
Man’yōshū (MYS 4385). 

 

色 


OJ: sika, siki, siko OC: *srək 

LH: ṣək EMC: ʂik GO: siki KN: sioku 

NOM: sắc SV: sắc SK: soyk 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram appears in a name in 
the Mino Census of 702: 色夫知 Sikobuti. In the Chikuzen Census of the same 
era we find the name 色夫 Sikobu, and in the Buzen Census there is the name 
色乎 Sikowo. This usage also appears on a number of mokkan: 名張里色夫知 
Sikobuti of NABARI Village (MK 2250). 

This usage appears in Kojiki, in names like 印色之入日子命 Inisiki NO 
IRIBIKWO [NO] MIKOTO (KG). Consider also, however, that the final -k in 色 is 
also used in representing siko: 内色許男命 UTUsikoWO [NO] MIKOTO (KG) 
and 伊賀迦色許賣命 Ikaga Sikomye [NO] MIKOTO (KG). 

In Shoku Nihongi an Ainu place name is recorded: 色麻柵 Fort Sikama 
(737.4.14). There is only one example of this phonogram in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 222 

奥波 OKITUNAMI My lord who lies on 

来依荒礒乎 KIYORU ARISWO wo the rocks on the rough beach 

色妙乃 sikiTAPE no as a pillow of bedding cloth 

枕等巻而 MAKURA to MAKITE where the waves of the offing 

奈世流君香聞 naseru KIMI KAmo come crashing in! 

 

式 


OJ: siki OC: *lhək 

LH: śɨk EMC: ɕik GO: siki KN: sioku 

NOM: thức SV: thức SK: sik 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in a document preserved in 
Shōsōin in the toponym 式下郡 Siki [NO] SIMO District, and the name 式万呂 


Sikimaro. This same name also appears in Shoku Nihongi: 式麻呂 (721.1.27). 
This phonogram also is used once in the poetry of Man’yōshū. 

MYS 323 

百式紀乃 MOMOsikwi no I do not recall the year when 

大宮人之 OPOMIYAPITO NO the courtiers of the great palace, 

飽田津尓 NIGITATU ni a fortress of 100 stones piled up 

船乗将為 PUNANORISIKYEMU boarded their ship 

年之不知久 TOSI NO SIRANAku and left the port of Nigita. 

Here the phonogram 式 introduces the initial consonant of 紀: sikkwi > 
sikwi. 

 

拭 


OJ: siki OC: *lhək 

LH: śɨk EMC: ɕik GO: siki KN: sioku 

NOM: xức, rị SV: thức SK: sik 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1337 

葛城乃 KADURAKWI no I wish I had known 

高間草野 TAKAMA NO KUYANWO earlier about the thatch field 

早知而 PAYA SIRITE high in the Kazuraki mountains 

標指益乎 SIME SASAMASI wo and marked it with a rope. 

今悔拭 IMA SO KUYAsiki I now regret it. 

The phonogram 拭 is used in a dual-role here. It represents the final -siki of 
the stative verb kuyasi ‘to regret,’ but it also adds a visual impact, as the graph 
also means ‘wipe away,’ suggesting that the poem wishes to wipe away the 
mistake (cf. Ōno 1962:484). 

 

叔 


OJ: siku OC: *nhiuk 

LH: śuk EMC: ɕuwk GO: suku KN: siuku 

NOM: NA SV: thức SK: sywuk 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only in Man’yōshū. Ōno 
(1962:451–452) wants to read all examples of this graph as suku, based on the 
example in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu: 蘇我馬古叔尼 Swoga Umako Sukune. 
However, the examples found in Man’yōshū point to siku. 

MYS 4190 

叔羅河 sikuraGAPA While you, my beloved, 

湍乎尋都追 SE wo TADUNEtutu follow the shallows 

和我勢故波 wa ga sekwo pa of the Shikura River 

宇可波多々佐祢 ukapa tatasane you should raise cormorants 

情奈具左尓 KOKORO nagusa ni to lift your spirits. 

It is possible that the example in Teisetsu is based on an earlier reading 
tradition where the palatalized ś- was flattened to just s- plus -u-, while later 
readings ignored the -u-, and made an attempt to represent ś as si. 

 


襲 


OJ: sipi OC: *s-ləp 

LH: zip EMC: zip LMC: sɦip GO: zifu KN: sifu 

NOM: tập SV: tập SK: sup 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. A quote from Chikuzen fudoki 
preserved in Man’yōshū chushaku has the following: 哿襲宮、哿襲ハ可紫比也 
‘Kasipi Palace. The graphs 哿襲 are (read) kasipi.’ 

 

質 


OJ: siti OC: *tət 

LH: tśit EMC: tɕit GO: siti KN: situ 

NOM: chất SV: chất SK: cil 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. In Izumo fudoki the name 質留比社 
Sitirupi Shrine appears. Later this name is changed to 七類 sitirui ‘seven types.’ 
In documents preserved in Shōsōin we find the toponym 越前國敦賀郡質覇郷 
Echizen Province Turuga District Sitipye Village. A mokkan excavated from 
Heijō ruins contains the name: 私部(質)比万呂 KISAKITIBYE (Siti)pi Maro 
(unnumbered tablet). 

 

漆 


OJ: situ OC: *tshit 

LH: tshit EMC: tshit LMC: tshit GO: siti KN: situ 

NOM: tất SV: tất SK: chil 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in a toponym in Izumo 
fudoki: 漆 沼 郷 、 本 字 志 刀 沼 ‘SituNUMA Village. It originally was 
SitwoNUMA.’ Ōno (1962:463) believes that the phonogram should be 柒, and 
claims that it is not a vulgar graph for 漆, because “柒 is used as an official 
graph to represent ‘seven.’ ” However, 漆 is also used to represent ‘seven,’ so it 
is better to view these two graphs as the same graph with variation. Some also 
argue that 刀 should be read tu, but it is possible that the original reading of two 
underwent vowel-raising. For the time being I follow the reading above. 

Documents preserved in Shōsōin have names such as 漆治 Situdi and 漆美 
賣 Situmimye. 

 

曾 


OJ: so OC: *tsə̂ ŋ 

LH: tsəŋ EMC: tsəŋ GO: zou KN: sou 

NOM: tằng, tưng, từng SV: tằng, tăng SK: chung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Tang-pyeng Paykcey 
Stele, ca. 660 in the kingdom of Paekche: 於曾城 *osə(ŋ) fortress. This 
phonogram is also found in the name of a mountain in Paekche recorded in Nihon 
shoki: 居曾山 Koso Mure (Ienaga et al. 1986.2:122). 

This phonogram is also preserved in the Suiko era corpus. In Jōgū shōtoku 
hōō teisetsu, the phonogram 曾 appears in a poem: 

伊加留我乃 ikaruga no Our Great Ruler’s name 

止美能乎何波乃 tomi no wogapa no will never be forgotten, 

多叡婆許曾 tayeba koso even if the brook 


和何於保支美乃 wa ga opokimi no Tomi in Ikaruga 

弥奈和須良叡米 mina wasurayeme should cease to flow in its bed. 

This phonogram was perhaps the most commonly used graph for writing so. 
The earliest dateable example of this phonogram appears in the Mino census of 
702: 也曾布売 Yasopumye, 彌曾売 Misomye, 与曾麻呂 Yoso Maro, and 
也曾売 Yasomye. 

This phonogram is used in the oldest liturgies: 曾布 Sopu (place name), and 
in the following phrase: 吾乎奈見給比曾 WARE wo na MITAMAPI so “Please do 
not look at me” (NT 12). This phonogram appears on a variety of mokkan: 笠阿 
曽弥安 KASA Asomi YASU (MK 1926), 曽祢黒女 Sone KURWOMYE (MK 
4661). 

According to Ōno (1977:172–174), the graph 曾 is used a total of 71 times 
in Kojiki. As an example: 曾毘良邇 sobira ni “on the square of her back…” 
(KG). 

KK 72 

多迦比迦流 takapikaru Prince of the sun 

比能美古 pi no mikwo which shines high 

宇倍志許曾 ubesi koso how truly 

斗比多麻閇 twopitamape you have inquired. 

麻許曾迩 makoso ni Of a truth 

斗比多麻閇 twopitamape you have inquired. 

阿禮許曾波 are koso pa It is certainly I who has 

余能那賀比登 yo no nagapito lived so long in the world. 

蘇良美都 sworamitu In the land of Yamato 

夜麻登能久迩爾 yamato no kuni ni which fills the firmament 

加理古牟登 kari kwomu to I have never heard of 

伊麻陀岐加受 imada kikazu a wild goose laying an egg. 

This phonogram is also used often in Nihon shoki, appearing four times in 
annotational notes, and 29 times in the poetry: 添山此云曾褒里能耶麻 
“ ‘Mount Sohori’ is read sopori no yama” (NSG), 曼椒此云褒曾紀 “ ‘Ginger’ 
is read posokwi” (NSG). 

NSK 48 

於辭氐屢 osi teru The beautiful beaches 

那珥破能瑳耆能 nanipa no saki no situated together on Naniwa Cape, 

那羅弭破莽 narabi pama illuminated by the sun— 

那羅陪務苔虚層 narabemu to koso the princess surely 

曾能古破阿利鷄梅 sono kwo pa arikyeme has been alive (such a pity). 

This phonogram is the primary phonogram found in Man’yōshū, appearing 
roughly 545 times. Admittedly, some scholars believe a number of these 
examples actually represent zo. 

MYS 815 

武都紀多知 mutukwi tati If the first month arrives 

波流能吉多良婆 paru no kitaraba and spring comes 

可久斯許曾 kaku si koso we will be like this, 

烏梅乎乎岐都々 ume wo wokitutu enjoying our time 

多努之岐乎倍米 tanwosiki wopeme inviting the plum blossoms. 

 


思 


OJ: so OC: *sə or *səh 

LH: siə EMC: sɨ or sɨh GO: si KN: si 

NOM: tư, tứ, tơ SV: tư, tứ SK: so 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. The usage of this graph is preserved on 
the inscriptions of Silla. On the Silla Cek-seng stele (ca. 551) the following 
toponym appears: 勿思伐城 *mot-sɨ-pat fortress. 

This phonogram is also preserved in the Suiko corpus. In the fragment of 
Jōgūki, the following name appears: 母母思己麻和加比彌, read as Momoso 
Komawaka Pimye. There are several interesting problems with this name. First, 
many scholars are confused by the use of 彌, which is mi, but as Ōno (1962:110) 
points out, there are examples like 吉多斯比彌乃彌己等: Kitasi Pimye no 
myikoto. This usage attests to the archaic nature of the transcription in Jōgūki, a 
fragment some still view suspiciously. In LH 彌 is *mieʔ. 

Second, attempts to relate this name to the mother of Prince Wakano 
Futamata in the record of Ōjin in Kojiki are tenuous. In Kojiki the name of the 
mother is written 百師木伊呂弁, but this represents MWOMWOsiKWI irobye, 
and that is only vaguely similar to Momoso Komawaka. Some may claim that the 
graphs 母 (OJ mo) and 毛 (OJ mwo) are easily confused when written in 
cursive, but the two do not resemble each other. It is better to consider this part of 
the genealogy either unreliable or altered. 

 

所 


OJ: so OC: *sraʔ 

LH: ṣɑʔ EMC: ṣjwoʔ GO: sio KN: so 

NOM: sỡ, sửa SV: sở SK: swo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, and appears in the Mino Census of 702: 
所波 Sopa, 所乃麻呂 Sono Maro. 

This phonogram also appears once in the Nihon shoki poetry: 

NSK 99 

柯羅屨儞嗚 kara kuni wo No matter what people 

以柯儞輔居等所 ika ni pu koto so may say about our land of Kara, 

梅豆羅古枳駄樓 medurakwo kitaru Mezurako has arrived. 

武哿左屨樓 mukasakuru Passing through the distant 

以祇能和駄唎嗚 iki no watari wo channel of Iki 

梅豆羅古枳駄樓 medurakwo kitaru Mezurako has at last arrived. 

The phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū six times. A number of these 
examples consist of 所 used in a skillful way, transcribing soko ‘there’ as 所虚, 
所己, or 所許 using 所 ‘place’ to represent so, but also giving the hint of ‘that 
place’ (MYS 194, 196, 1740). Another example is 曾許念尓 / 胸己所痛 soko 
OMOPU ni / MUNE koso ITAKI ‘when I think about that / it is my chest that is 
pained’ (MYS 466). 

As Ōno (1977:475) points out, there is also a problematic poem, quoted 
below: 

MYS 3362 

相模祢乃 sagamune no Looking out far at the peak 

乎美祢見所久思 womine MIsokusi of Sagamu Ridge 


和須礼久流 wasurekuru I call out the name of my beloved 

伊毛我名欲妣弖 imwo ga NA ywobite whom I have come to forget— 

吾乎祢之奈久奈 A wo nesi naku na do not call out and make me cry. 

This is what most manuscripts of Man’yōshū have, but as there are no other 
examples of the verb misokusu recorded, scholars have been skeptical of this 
form. Currently scholarship amends the second stanza to 乎美祢見可久思 
womine MIkakusi ‘pretending not to see the peak.’ For the time I have followed 
what the texts have, relying on the interpretation of Sengaku (1978:174). 

 

增 


OJ: so OC: *tsə̂ ŋ 

LH: tsəŋ EMC: tsəŋ LMC: tsəaŋ GO: sou KN: zou 

NOM: tăng, tâng SV: tăng, tặng SK: cung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears once in Nihon shoki in the 
Jinmu record: 層增岐野 Sosoki Plain. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, appearing in ten different poems, 
but interestingly nine of these use an established set of graphs: 許增 koso 
‘indeed’ (examples found in MYS 985, 1391, 2145, 2269, 2651, 2865, 2868, 
2922, and 2979). 

MYS 985 

天尓座 AME ni MASU Master Tsukiyomi 

月讀壮子 TUKWIYOMI WOTOKWO who resides in the heavens— 

幣者将為 MAPI PA SEMU I offer you a gift, so make 

今夜乃長者 KOYOPI no NAGAsa the length of our night tonight 

五百夜継許増 IPOYWO TUGI koso five hundred nights joined together. 

 

噌 


OJ: so OC: NA 

LH: səŋ EMC: səŋ GO: siau KN: sau 

NOM: tằng, tăng, tưng SV: tưng SK: coyng, cung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Hizen fudoki for the 
toponym 噌唹 Soo. This same usage appears in fragments of Fudoki quoted in 
Shaku Nihongi (Chikuzen fudoki and Hizen fudoki). As this phonogram is only 
used for the toponyms in southern Kyūshū it likely is simply an idiosyncratic 
usage, an innovative use linked to 曾於, perhaps to show vowel length. 

 

僧 


OJ: so OC: NA 

LH: səŋ EMC: səŋ GO: sou KN: sou 

NOM: tăng SV: tăng SK: sung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This graph appears in a Nara era 
document in the Shōsōin: 奈能僧 nanoso. This phonogram also appears in one 
poem in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 817 

烏梅能波奈 ume no pana The green willow 

佐吉多流僧能々 sakitaru sono no in the garden where 

阿遠也疑波 awoyagwi pa the plum is in bloom 


可豆良尓須倍久 kadura ni subeku has filled out so well 

奈利尓家良受夜 narinikyerazu ya that you could adorn your hair. 

 

則 


OJ: so OC: *tsə̂ k 

LH: tsək EMC: tsək GO: soku KN: soku 

NOM: tắc SV: tắc SK: cuk 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The graph appears twice in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 822 

和何則能尓 wa ga sono ni The plum blossoms 

宇米能波奈知流 ume no pana tiru scatter in my garden. 

比佐可多能 pisakata no Or does snow come 

阿米欲里由吉能 ame ywori yuki no wafting down from 

那何列久流加母 nagare kuru kamo the heavens far above? 

 

諸 


OJ: so OC: *ta 

LH: tśɑ EMC: tśjwo LMC: tʂia GO: sio KN: sio 

NOM: chư, chứ, chơ SV: chư SK: cye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to LJS, and appears twice in the poetry of Nihon 
shoki: 

NSK 104 

斯那提流 sinateru Starving for want of food 

箇多烏箇夜摩爾 katawokayama ni on Mount Kataoka, 

伊比爾惠弖 ipi ni wete the shining hill, 

許夜勢屢 koyaseru how pitiful is that farmer 

諸能多比等阿波禮 sono tapito apare who has fallen. 

於夜那斯爾 oya nasi ni Surely you were not 

那禮奈理雞迷夜 narenarikyeme ya raised without parents. 

佐須陀氣能 sasu take no Do you have no lord, 

枳彌波夜那祇 kimi paya naki strong like bamboo? 

伊比爾惠弖 ipi ni wete Starving for want of food 

許夜勢留 koyaseru how pitiful is that farmer 

諸能多比等阿波禮 sono tapito apare who has fallen. 

 

贈 


OJ: so OC: *dzə̂ ŋh 

LH: dzəŋh EMC: dzəŋh LMC: tsɦəaŋ GO: zou KN: sou 

NOM: tặng SV: tặng SK: cung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in Nihon shoki three times in 
the poetry. 

NSK 85 

阿佐膩簸囉 asadipara Through the rocky path of 

嗚贈禰嗚須擬 wosone wo sugwi the mountains and over 

謨謀逗頴甫 momodutapu Asaji Plain comes a distant, 

奴底喩羅倶慕與 nute yuraku mo yo continuous jingle of a bell. 

於岐毎倶羅之慕 okime kurasi mo It seems Okime has arrived. 


This phonogram is also found in Shoku Nihongi, in the toponym 贈於 Soo. 
This same usage also appears in Hizen fudoki. 

 

層 


OJ: so OC: *dzə̂ ŋ 

LH: dzəŋ EMC: dzəŋ LMC: tsɦəəŋ GO: zou KN: sou 

NOM: tầng, từng SV: tằng, tầng SK: chung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears four times in the poetry of 
Nihon shoki. 

NSK 28 

伊徒姑播茂 itwokwo pa mo Men with relatives 

伊徒姑奴池 itwokwo dwoti will fight together. 

伊裝阿波那 iza apana Commence the battle, 

和例波 ware pa shall we? 

多摩岐波屢 tamaki paru Minister Uti, 

于池能阿層餓 uti no aso ga possessing a strong spirit, 

波邏濃知波 paranuti pa does not have a stomach 

異佐誤阿例椰 isagwo are ya made of pebbles. 

伊裝阿波那 iza apana Commence the battle, 

和例波 ware pa shall we? 

 

賊 


OJ: so OC: *dzə̂ k 

LH: dzək EMC: dzek LMC: tsɦəăk GO: zoku KN: soku 

NOM: tặc SV: tặc SK: cuk, cek 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in one poem in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 75 

野麼等能 yamato no On the peaks 

嗚武羅能陀該儞 womura no take ni of the mountains of Yamato, 

之々符須登 sisi pusu to who shall venture forth 

拕例柯 tare ka to stand before 

擧能居登 kono koto the great one and tell him 

飫裒磨陛儞麻嗚須 opomapye ni mawosu where the beast lays waiting? 

飫裒枳瀰簸 opokimi pa The great lord 

賊據嗚枳舸斯題 soko wo kikasite overhears these words, 

柁磨々枳能 tamamaki no takes his jeweled 

阿娯羅儞陀々伺 agura ni tatatsi dais and sits upon it. 

It should be noted that this usage again shows the underlying germination of 
velars, with soko < sokko (賊據). 

 

衣 


OJ: so OC: *ʔəi or *ʔəih 

LH: ʔɨi or ʔɨih EMC: ʔjəi or ʔjəih GO: e KN: i 

NOM: y, e SV: y, ỳ, ỷ SK: uy 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, where 衣 ‘robe’ suggests to the reader Old Japanese so 
‘robe, outer garment.’ This usage appears in both Kojiki and Nihon shoki to write 


the same name of a princess: 衣通郎女 SOtu IRATUMYE (in Nihon shoki her 
name is written 衣通郎姫). This kungana also appears twice in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2885 

左夜深而 saYWO PUKETE As the night deepens 

妹乎念出 IMWO wo OMOPIDE and I recall my beloved, 

布妙之 SIKITAPE NO even my pillow with 

枕毛衣世二 MAKURA mo SOYO ni the spread out fiber bedding 

嘆鶴鴨 NAGEKITURU KAMO creaks as I have lamented. 

 

背 


OJ: so OC: *pə̂ kh 

LH: pəh EMC: pwâ̘ ih GO: fai KN: fai 

NOM: bối, bội, bồi, bổi SV: bối, bội SK: poy, phay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram is used as a kungana, suggesting to the mind Old Japanese 
‘back.’ This usage appears once in Man’yōshū, in the first poem. 

MYS 1 

山跡乃國者 YAMATO no KUNI PA The land of Yamato 

押奈戸手 OSInaPETE every nook and cranny 

吾許曾居 WARE koso WORE I alone rule over! 

師吉名倍手 sikiNAbeTE The entire realm 

吾己曾座 WARE koso IMASE I alone govern! 

我許背齒 WA koSO BA Then it shall be I 

告目 NORAME who will tell you 

家呼毛名雄母 IPYE wo mo NA WO mo of my home and of my name. 

 

苑 


OJ: so OC: *ʔonʔ or *wənʔ 

LH: ʔyanʔ or wunʔ EMC: ʔjwɐnʔ or jwən GO: won KN: wen 

NOM: tặc SV: tặc SK: cuk, cek 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, where 苑 ‘garden’ suggests to the reader’s mind Old 
Japanese so ‘garden,’ likely a truncated form of sono. This usage appears once in 
Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3792 

死者木苑 SINABA KOSO You will surely avoid it 

相不見在目 APIMIZU ARAME if you were to die, 

生而在者 IKITE ARABA but if you live on 

白髪子等丹 SIRWOKAMI KWORA NI then you young ones 

不生在目八方 OPWIZAME YAMO will grow grey hair. 

Some have said this 苑 cannot be a kungana, as there are no examples of so 
to represent sono. However, it is difficult to imagine what else the semantic 
match of 木苑 ‘tree-garden’ could represent. 

 

襲 


OJ: so OC: s-ləp 

LH: zip EMC: zjəp GO: zifu KN: sifu 

NOM: tập SV: tập SK: sup 


Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, where the graph 襲 ‘extra layer of clothing’ calls to mind 
Old Japanese so ‘robe, outer garment.’ This usage appears in Nihon shoki, mainly 
to write the name of the rebellious tribe 熊襲 KUMASO. Kojiki represents this 
tribe’s name as 熊曾 KUMAso. Shoki’s rendition likely is a pun, since 襲 also 
means ‘surprise attack.’ 

This phonogram is also used for the famous general Sotsuhiko, sent by the 
court to chastise Silla. His name is spelled 襲津彦 SOTU PIKWO. 

 

須 


OJ: su OC: *sno 

LH: sio EMC: suə GO: su KN: siu 

NOM: tua SV: tu SK: sywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. A stele at a Paekche Buddhist temple 
contains the name 須菩提 Subote (Subhūti), one of the disciples of Buddha. 
This phonogram is also found on the Kwangkaytho stele: 須鄒城 *sio-tsuw 
fortress. 

The phonogram 須 does not appear in the Suiko era corpus, but does appear 
in many names recorded in the Korean records quoted in Nihon shoki. The name 
of the 14th king of Paekche, King Kunkusu, is written as 王子貴須 Crown 
Prince Kwisu (Ienaga et al. 1986.1:357). Also, Paekche King Kayro (蓋鹵王) is 
called 加須利君 Lord Kasuri in the record of Yūryaku (ibid. 1986.1:471). This 
is interesting from a Later Han phonological point of view as 蓋鹵 is kas-lɔ is 
quite close to the Japanese rendition of kasuri. 

This phonogram appears in the liturgies: 所知食止(古語云志呂志女須) 
SIROSIMYESU to (KOGO NI sirosiMYEsu) “(We say) rule (‘rule’ is sirosimyesu in 
the ancient vernacular)…” (NT 8). 

This phonogram appears on a variety of mokkan: 須佐里 Susa Village (MK 
2200), 古須酒二升 ‘two MASU (about 7 pints) of kwosu SAKE (strained sake)’ 
(MK 104), 加 麻 須 五 烈 kamasu ITUTURA ‘five lines of saury pike’ 
(unnumbered tablet). 

The phonogram 須 was popular in Japan, and is the main character used to 
transcribe su in Kojiki. In Kojiki many names contain this phonogram: 須比智迩 
神 the deity Supitini (KG), and 波迩夜須毘古神 the deity Paniyasubikwo 
(KG). Perhaps the best known example is 建速須佐之男命 TAKYE PAYANOWO 
[NO] MIKOTO (KG). 

This phonogram also appears in Kojiki poetry: 

KK 93 

比氣多能 piketa no On the field of young, 

和加久流須婆良 wakakurusubara nestled chestnuts in Hiketa 

和加久閇爾 wakaku pe ni I should have slept with you 

韋泥弖麻斯母能 winete masi mono when you were still young, 

淤伊爾祁流加母 oinikeru kamo but now how I have aged. 

This phonogram is also used widely in both the annotational notes and poetry 
of Nihon shoki, appearing 18 times in the notes, and 49 times in the poetry. The 
following are from the annotational notes: 皇産靈、此云美武須毘 “ ‘The spirit 


of imperial birth’ is read mimusupi” (NSG), 御統、此云美須磨屢 “ ‘Honorific 
jewels on a string’ is read misumaru” (NSG). 

NSK 94 

伊須能箇瀰 isu no kami We passed through 

賦屢嗚須擬底 puru wo sugwite Furu of Isunokami. 

擧慕摩矩羅 komo makura We passed by the valley 

柁箇播志須擬 takapasi sugwi of Takahashi of straw pillows. 

慕能娑播儞 monosapa ni We walked through 

於裒野該須擬 opoyake sugwi Ōyake where many things are. 

播屢比 parupi We went by Kasuga, 

箇須我嗚須擬 kasuga wo sugwi written ‘spring-day.’ 

逗摩御慕屢 tumagomoru We traveled through 

嗚佐裒嗚須擬 wosapo wo sugwi Osaho, the hidden wife. 

拕摩該儞播 tamake nipa On the jeweled ritual plate 

伊比佐倍母理 ipi sape mori we piled rice high. 

拕摩慕比儞 tamamopi ni The jeweled ritual cup 

瀰逗佐倍母理 midu sape mori we filled with water. 

儺岐曾裒遲喩倶謀 nakisopoti yuku mo On goes the procession, 

柯㝵比謎阿婆例 kage pime apare weeping and wet; poor 

 Kagehime. 

This is also the predominant phonogram used in Man’yōshū, appearing 
roughly 600 times in the anthology. 

MYS 3582 

大船乎 OPOBUNE wo My lord who is on 

安流美尓伊太之 arumi ni idasi the great ship that will depart 

伊麻須君 imasu KIMI out into the choppy sea— 

都追牟許等奈久 tutumu koto naku Come back to me 

波也可敝里麻勢 paya kapyerimase without any impediments. 

The simplified form of 須 is the basis for katakana ス. 

 

周 


OJ: su OC: *tiu 

LH: tśu EMC: tɕuw GO: siu KN: siuu 

NOM: chu SV: chu, châu SK: cywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. A Paekche name appears in Shoki: 周 
智 suti (Ienaga et al. 1986.2:196). The interlinear reading is シュ, which is 
based on the scribes’ knowledge of Go-on, the earlier usage being シウ. Notice 
that the EMC is tɕuw, and LH is tśu. Old Japanese did not have an affricate initial, 
so su would have been the closest sound. Granted, it is possible that the Korean 
name was affricate initial (tsuti), but if the phonogram 周 was used in the early 
Japanese orthography, it would have represented su. 

This phonogram appears in the following place names: 周芳國造 Governor 
of Supa. This same place name is found in other records with the same initial 
graph 周 (Kujiki’s 10th book, Kokuzō hongi, Man’yōshū, and Shoku Nihongi all 
have 周防). Wooden documents (mokkan) also preserve a place name from Oki 
Island: 隠伎国周吉郡 Oki Province, Suki District (MKK 5:82). The place 


name 播磨国赤穂郡周勢郷 Parima Province Akapo District Suse Village (MK 
12601) also appears on an excavated bamboo tablet. 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki in three poems: 

NSK 39 

伽辭能輔珥 kasi nopu ni In an oak forest 

豫區周塢菟區利 yokusu wo tukuri we made a wide mortar. 

豫區周珥 yokusu ni In that wide mortar 

伽綿蘆淤朋瀰枳 kamyeru opomiki we brewed this auspicious wine. 

宇摩羅珥 umara ni Enjoy it as 

枳虚之茂知塢勢 kikosi motiwose you partake of it— 

摩呂餓智 maro ga ti our father. 

This phonogram also appears a number of times in Man’yōshū, aside from 
representing Supa. 

MYS 877 

比等母祢能 pito mo ne no Will you forget 

宇良夫禮遠留尓 urabure woru ni even the people who 

多都多夜麻 tatuta yama are feeling dejected 

美麻知可豆加婆 mima tikadukaba if the august horse 

和周良志奈牟迦 wasurasinamu ka approaches Mount Tatsuta? 

 

州 


OJ: su OC: *tu 

LH: tśu EMC: tɕuw GO: su KN: siuu 

NOM: châu SV: chu, châu SK: cywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Paekche Cengrin 
Temple inscription (ca. 660), writing the name Susiba: 州司馬. Notice also on 
the Sumida Hachiman mirror inscription (ca. 503?) the phonetic rendering 今州 
利 *kɨm-tśu-lih, a name, Komtsuri. 

This phonogram is also used in Nihon shoki to record various names of 
people related to the peninsula (I render 州 as a fricative instead of an affricate 
as we do not know for sure how the Paekche used this phonogram): 彌州流 
Myisuru, 汶州王 King Monsu, 州利即爾将軍 General Suri Soni, and 己州己 
婁 Kosukoru. 

Several of these names are glossed in Nihon shoki and Shaku Nihongi as つ 
tu, but I believe this is a later rendering. As the Sino-Xenic data show, this graph 
likely had an affricate initial, which Japanese lacked. Therefore, su was the 
closest available syllable. As evidence for this, consider that King Monsu is 
written 汶州王 in Shoki, but Samkwuk saki gives 文周 and a note that he was 
also known as 汶洲. 

This phonogram is used once in Kojiki, where the graph 烟 ‘soot’ is glossed 
as 州須 susu (KG). As the Japanese became more proficient in writing their 
language, this graph was discarded, because it did not match a specific Japanese 
syllable close enough to have been of use. 

 

酒 


OJ: su OC: *tsju(ʔ) 

LH: tsiuʔ EMC: tsuw GO: siu KN: siuu 

NOM: tửu SV: tửu SK: cywu 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. A name appears in the record of Kinmei 
次酒 with the interlinear reading of sisu. Again, based on the reconstructed 
phonology of Chinese, these two characters are likely transcribing tsih-tsuw, but 
as Old Japanese had no affricates, this became sisu. 

The phonogram 酒 also appears in the following annotational note: 春日此 
云箇酒鵝 “ ‘Kasuga,’ this is read kasuga.” Clearly 酒 is transcribing [su]. 
Several names preserved in the Shōsōin documents of the Nara era use this 
graph: 宇酒万呂 Usumaro, 川造伊酒賀賣 KAPA MIYATUKWO Isugamye, and 
川部牟酒賣 KAPABYE Musumye. 

This phonogram appears sparingly in Kojiki, used twice in one song: 

KK 42 

伊知遲志麻 itidi sima Reaching Ichiji and 

美志麻迩斗岐 misima ni twoki Mishima Islands 

美本杼理能 mipwodori no diving into the water 

迦豆伎伊岐豆岐 kaduki ikiduki of the diving grebe, 

志那陀由布 sinadayupu and coming back up for air— 

佐佐那美遲袁 sasanamidi wo as I steadily advance across 

酒久酒久登 suku suku to the ripples of the waves 

和賀伊麻勢婆夜 wa ga imaseba ya that are high and low 

許波多能 kopata no there is a maiden 

美知迩 miti ni that I have run across 

阿波志斯袁登賣 apasisi wotomye on the path to Kohata. 

There is some textual variation here in this poem regarding the use of 酒. 
There is a textual variant, which most editors accept, where the stanza is 須久須 
久. Onoda Mitsuo’s critical text waffles on the choice, but his note reminds us 
(1977:445–446), “It goes without saying that the archetype was this character 酒, 
but that does not necessarily mean that 須 is simply a scribal error. I believe 須 
was already in the original text.” The textual issues need not detain us, because it 
is already clear that the character 酒 was used to transcribe [su] before Kojiki 
was compiled. Perhaps the archetype of this stanza was 酒久須久 or 須久酒久, 
and dittography later corrupted the text. 

This phonogram appears once in the annotational notes and once in the 
poetry of Nhion shoki: 春日、此云箇酒鵝 “ ‘Kasuga’ is read kasuga” (NSG). 

NSK 102 

夜酒瀰志斯 yasumisisi In the heavenly 

和餓於朋耆瀰能 wa ga opokimi no eighty [rays of] sunshine where 

訶勾理摩須 kakurimasu my great lord hides, 

阿摩能椰蘇河礙 ama no yaswokage who rules in peace— 

異泥多々須 idetatasu if you go out and 

This phonogram is used in Man’yōshū nine times, of which over half, five 
examples, appear in Book 14. 

MYS 3487 

安豆左由美 adusayumi Jewels wrapped around 

須恵尓多麻末吉 suwe ni tama maki the end of the catalpa bow— 

可久須酒曽 kaku susu so like that wrapped together 


宿莫奈那里尓思 NE NAna narinisi we were not able to sleep, 

於久乎可奴加奴 oku wo kanu kanu thinking too much of the future. 

 

洲 


OJ: su OC: *tu 

LH: tśu EMC: tɕuw GO: su KN: siu 

NOM: chao SV: châu SK: cywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The earliest attestation of this character 
is in Kojiki in the place name 洲羽海 supa [NO] UMI ‘Sea of Supa’ (KG). This 
phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, in the name of the mother of Keikō: 日 
葉洲媛, PIBAsu PIMYE (NSG). This phonogram appears on a wooden document, 
dated the ninth month of 735: 賀郡都比□□洲里 …ga District TupiXXsu 
Village (unnumbered tablet). 

This phonogram appears in two poems in Man’yōshū (MYS 4029, 4101), 
transcribing the same place name: 珠洲能宇美 susu no umi ‘the Sea of Susu.’ It 
seems certain that these two phonograms were selected because of the underlying 
semantics: 珠洲 susu ‘pearl-island.’ 

MYS 4125 

安麻泥良須 amaderasu From the Age of the Gods 

可未能御代欲里 kamwi no MIYO ywori who shined in the heavens, 

夜洲能河波 yasu no kapa the Yasu River forming 

奈加尓敝太弖々 naka ni pyedatete a partition in the middle, 

牟可比太知 mukapi tati they stand facing each other, 

蘇泥布利可波之 swode purikapasi waving their sleeves at each other. 

 

酢 


OJ: su OC: *dzâk 

LH: dzɑk EMC: dzak GO: su KN: so 

NOM: tạc SV: tạc SK: cak, chwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. At first glance, one is tempted to label 
this a kungana, meaning ‘vinegar,’ su. But from the Sino-Xenic data (GO and 
SK), it seems clear that the reading of this graph without the final velar was used 
to represent su, and this word was imported from Chinese into Japanese as 
‘vinegar.’ The word is still used in Mandarin cù. Vowel raising in Old Japanese 
changed this to su (*tshɔh > *swo > su). 

While the usage of 酢 su is somewhat rare, it appears in both Nihon shoki 
and Kojiki. There is only one example in Kojiki, 酢鹿 Suga, the name of a 
person (KG). Conversely, there are 18 examples of 酢 in Nihon shoki, but these 
are all in personal names. A prime example is 火酢芹命 PO [NO] SuSERI, the 
brother of Jinmu. 

This phonogram appears in Man’yōshū 19 times, the majority writing 為酢 
寸 SUsuKI ‘eulalia, miscanthus.’ 

MYS 307 

皮為酢寸 PADA SUsuKI Eulalia waving in the wind 

久米能若子我 kume no WAKUGWO ga the young men of the Kume 

伊座家留 i MASIkyeru are present among us. 


三穂乃石室者 MIPO no IPAYA PA How I never tire of 

雖見不飽鴨 MIREDO AKANU KAMO looking at the cavern of Miho. 

 

主 


OJ: su OC: *toʔ 

LH: tśoʔ EMC: tɕua GO: siu KN: siu 

NOM: chủ chúa SV: chủ, chúa SK: cywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. This character appears twice in Kojiki in 
the same word, 国主, KUNIsu, which is the earlier version of the later word kuzu 
(kunisu > kunsu > kunzu), the original dwellers in Yamato. 

This phonogram appears in one Nihon shoki poem: 

NSK 69 

和餓儺勾菟摩 wa ga naku tuma I weep for my spouse— 

箇哆儺企貳 kata naki ni and I whimper. 

和餓儺勾菟摩 wa ga naku tuma I cry for my spouse. 

去鐏去會 kozo koso It was last night 

椰主區泮娜布例 yasuku pada pure that our flesh calmly touched. 

 

寸 


OJ: su OC: *tshûns 

LH: tshənh EMC: tshwənh GO: sumu KN: son 

NOM: són, thốn, xốn SV: thốn SK: chwon 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It is tempting to date it back further, but 
as there is no evidence on the peninsula, I have placed it here. It appears in the 
hereditary title 寸主 suguri (Nihon shoki, mokkan), which may be partly 
phonetic, and partly semantic. The phonogram 寸 represents sun- of sunguri. 

The cursive form of this phonogram later yields hiragana す. 

 

珠 


OJ: su OC: *to 

LH: tśo EMC: tɕua GO: su KN: siu 

NOM: châu, chau SV: châu SK: cywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It appears in the Yamashiro provincial 
census of 733 to write the place name Yasu District 夜珠郡. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū to write the Sea of Susu 珠洲海 
(MYS 4029 and 4101). 

This phonogram is also used in Hitachi fudoki to render the names of several 
deities: 毗那良珠命 and 比奈良珠命, both which represent ‘the deity Pinarasu.’ 
An old word for the heavenly grandchild is also written 珠売美萬 sumye mima 
‘the ruling grandchild.’ 

 

數 


OJ: su OC: *sro 

LH: ṣoʔ EMC: ʂuə GO: su, soku KN: su 

NOM: sổ, số, sô, xổ, xỏ SV: sổ, số SK: swu, sak, chwok 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in Man’yōshū, once in the 
following poem. 


MYS 1742 

級照 SINATERU Pulling the red skirt 

片足羽河之 KATASIPAGAPA NO over the top of 

左丹塗 saNI NURI NO the great bridge 

大橋之上従 OPOPASI NO UPE YU painted crimson 

紅 KURENAWI NO spanning the Katashiha River, 

赤裳數十引 AKAMO SUSWOBIKI the shining river, 

山藍用 YAMA AWI MOTI you put on the garment 

揩衣服而 SURERU KINU KITE dyed in mountain indigo. 

 

種 


OJ: su OC: *toŋ 

LH: tśoŋ EMC: tɕuawŋ GO: siu KN: siou 

NOM: chủng, giống, tròng SV: chủng, chúng SK: cywong 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This appears in the toponym 種淮郡 
Suwe District (MYS 4358). This toponym in Upper Fusa is later written 周淮 
suwe. 

 

衆 


OJ: su OC: *tuŋh 

LH: tśuŋh EMC: tśuŋh GO: siu KN: siuu 

NOM: chúng SV: chúng SK: cywung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This appears in Shoku Nihongi in the the 
name 狛 祁 乎 理 和 久 古衆連 (And altered his name from) KOMAgye 
Woriwaku to Kwosu [NO] MURAZI (724.5.13). 

 

春 


OJ: su OC: *thun 

LH: tśhuin EMC: tśhjwen GO: siun KN: siun 

NOM: xuân, xoan SV: xuân SK: chywo, swo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Shoku Nihongi in the name: 
荅本陽春麻田連 (The name of) Tapo Yasu was altered to ASADA [NO] 
MURAZI (724.5.13). 

 

秀 


OJ: su OC: *suh 

LH: siuh EMC: suw LMC: siw GO: siu KN: siu 

NOM: tú SV: tú SK: sywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in one poem in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 24 

阿佐志毛能 asasimwo no The morning frost melts— 

瀰悶能佐烏麼志 mike no sawobasi courtiers cross over 

魔弊菟耆瀰 mapyetu kimi the little tree bridge 

伊和哆羅秀暮 iwatarasu mo to and fro from work; 

瀰開能佐烏麼志 mike no sawobasi over the little tree bridge. 

 


殊 


OJ: su OC: *do 

LH: dźo EMC: dʑuə LMC: ʂɦyə GO: ziu KN: siu 

NOM: thùa, thò SV: thù SK: sywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and it appears four times in the poetry 
of Nihon shoki: 

NSK 18 

瀰磨紀異利寐胡播揶 mimakwi iribikwo paya Oh, Mimaki Iribiko! 

飫廼餓烏塢 ono ga wo wo You play with a princess, 

志齊務苔 sisemu to not even knowing that 

農殊末句志羅珥 nusumaku sirazi someone is secretly 

比売那素寐殊望 pimye naswobisu mo planning to take your life. 

 

輸 


OJ: su OC: *lho or *hjo 

LH: śo EMC: ɕuə LMC: ʂyə GO: siu KN: siu 

NOM: thâu, thua SV: du, thâu, thú SK: sywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to CBS. It appears 13 times in the poetry of Nihon 
shoki. 

NSK 73 

瀰椰比等能 miyabito no How unfortunate. 

阿由臂能古輸孺 ayupi no kwosuzu The small bells on the leg straps 

於智珥岐等 otiniki to of the courtiers 

瀰椰比等々豫牟 miyapito toyomu fell off and the courtiers clamor. 

佐杜弭等茂由梅 satobito mo yume Beware, you people at home! 

 

素 


OJ: su OC: *sah 

LH: sɑh > sɔh EMC: sɔ LMC: suə GO: so KN: su 

NOM: tố SV: tố SK: swo 

Usage / History: 

The phonogram 素 is used to transcribe two different syllables, swo and su. 
When 素 represents su it belongs to the CBS, based on LMC, which is only 
found in Nihon shoki. The famous example from Nihon shoki is the rendition of 
Susanoo’s name, 素戔嗚尊 Susa [NO] wo [NO] MIKOTO (Kojiki writes the name 
as 須佐之男命). 

This phonogram appears once in the annotational notes, and four times in the 
poetry: 清地此云素鵝 “ ‘Pure land,’ this is called suga” (NSG). 

NSK 2 

阿妹奈屢夜 ame naru ya In the heavens, 

乙登多奈婆多廼 ototanabata no the jewels strung upon 

汙奈餓勢屢 unagaseru the string hung around 

多磨廼彌素磨屢廼 tama no misumaru no the neck of the Weaver Maiden 

阿奈陀磨波夜 anadama pa ya are very beautiful— 

彌多爾 mitani like the beauty of him who 

輔柁和柁羅須 puta watarasu shines over two hills, 

阿泥素企多伽避顧禰 adisuki takapikwone Azisuki Takahikone. 

 


蒭 


OJ: su OC: *tshro 

LH: tṣho EMC: tʂhuə LMC: tʂhuə GO: siu KN: su 

NOM: so SV: sô SK: chywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to CBS, appearing only once in the annotational 
notes of Nihon shoki: 壓、此云飫蒭 “ ‘suppress’ is read osu” (NSG). 

 

樔 


OJ: su OC: *dzrâu 

LH: dẓau EMC: dzaɨw GO: zeu KN:sau 

NOM: sào, rào SV: sào SK: chywo, swo 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, with the graph suggesting to the mind Old Japanese su 
‘nest.’ This usage is mainly found in Kojiki and Nihon shoki. 

The graph 樔 is used primarily in Kojiki to represent the names of deities or 
royal princes and princesses: 高御産樔日神 the deity TAKA MIMUSUBI (KG), 
石樔比売神 the deity ISISU Pimye (KG), and 石樔別命 ISISU WAKE (KG). 

According to Ōno (1977:824), there are seven examples of 樔 used to write 
toponyms in Nihon shoki, but he does not list any examples. I provide three 
examples: 歌荒樔田 UTA ARASUDA (a place in Yamashiro, NSG), 倉樔 
KURASU (it is not clear which province this place was in, NSG), and 國樔部 
KUNISUBYE (of Yoshino, NSG). 

 

栖 


OJ: su OC: *sə̂ i or *snə̂ i 

LH: sei or sen EMC: sɛj GO: sai KN: sei 

NOM: thê SV: tê, thê SK: sye 

Usage / History: 

This kungana, 栖 ‘nest,’ suggests to the reader Old Japanese word su ‘nest.’ 
There are two graphs, both representing su ‘nest’ in the corpus, this graph and 樔 
(see above). This usage 栖 appears a number of times in the Mino census (702): 
栗栖太里 KURISU PUTOri, and 栗栖田 KURISUDA. It also appears a few 
times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1919 

國栖等之 KUNISURA GA Like the people of Kunisu 

春菜将採 PARUNA TUMURAMU who are out picking wild herbs 

司馬乃野之 siba no NWO NO on the moor of Shiba, 

數君麻 SIBASIBA KIMI WO time and again 

思比日 OMOPU KONO KORO I find myself thinking of you. 

 

簀 


OJ: su OC: *tsrêk 

LH: tṣɛk EMC: tʂəɨjk GO: siaku KN: saku 

NOM: NA SV: trách SK: choyk 

Usage / History: 

This kungana, 簀 ‘bed mat,’ and suggests Old Japanese su ‘mat for bedding 
made of reeds or other material.’ This graph appears once in the Mino Census 
(702) in the toponym 本簀郡 MOTOSU District. It is also used once in Kojiki 
in the phrase 末押縻魚簀 SUWE OSINABURU NASU ‘and as if one were waving 
the tip (of the bamboo) back and forth…’ (KG). 


There are also seven examples of this, all in the first half of Nihon shoki, in 
personal names like 稻田宮主簀狹之八箇耳 INADA [NO] MIYANUSI SUSA NO 
YATUMIMI (three times, NSG), 彦蒋簀命 PIKWO KOMOSU [NO] MIKOTO 
(NSG), and 宮簀媛 MIYASU PIMYE (three times, NSG). 

This kungana also appears twice in Man’yōshū. One example is: 

MYS 1176 

夏麻引 NATU SWOBIKU Pulling up hemp in summer, 

海上滷乃 UNAKAMIGATA no on the sandbar in the offing 

奥洲尓 OKITUSU ni of the Unakami wetlands 

鳥者簀竹跡 TORI PA SUDAKEDO birds noisly flock together, but I 

君者音文不為 KIMI PA OTO mo SEZU have not heard a peep from you. 

 

渚 


OJ: su OC: *taʔ 

LH: tśɑʔ > tśɔʔ EMC: tśjwoʔ GO: sio KN: sio 

NOM: chã, chớ, chưa SV: chử SK: cye 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind Old Japanese su ‘sandbar.’ This graph 
mainly appears in Man’yōshū and Nihon shoki. Below is an example from each 
work. 

In Nihon shoki there is the toponym 長渚崎 NAGASU Cape (NSG). 

MYS 2751 

味乃住 ADI no SUMU Like the pines on 

渚沙乃入江之 SUsa no IRIYE no the rough beach of the inlet 

荒礒松 ARASWO MATU where the teal settle, 

我乎待兒等波 A wo MATU KWORA pa there is only one 

但一耳 TADA PITORI NOMWI who pines for me. 

 

爲 


OJ: su OC: *wai 

LH: wai EMC: jwe GO: wi KN: wi 

NOM: vị, vi, vì SV: vị, vi SK: wuy 

Usage / History: 

When transcribing su this kungana suggests to the reader Old Japanese su ‘to 
do.’ This usage is only found in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 307 

皮為酢寸 PADA SUsuKI Eulalia waving in the wind 

久米能若子我 kume no WAKUGWO ga the young men of the Kume 

伊座家留 i MASIkyeru are present among us. 

三穂乃石室者 MIPO no IPAYA PA How I never tire of 

雖見不飽鴨 MIREDO AKANU KAMO looking at the cavern of Miho. 

 

足 


OJ: suku OC: *tsok 

LH: tsiok EMC: tsjwok GO: siu, soku KN: sioku 

NOM: túc SV: túc, tụ SK: cyok, cwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It is mainly used to transcribe a 
hereditary title, sukune, and appears on the earliest sword inscription in Japan. 
The title is transcribed as 足尼, interpreted as suk-ne (LH tsiok-neih), but 


actually suggesting *sok-nei (which may represent an earlier form before vowel 
raising). It is unclear why, but this earlier usage (as well as 叔尼, see below) was 
later altered to 宿禰 (see 宿 below), unless to bring the phonogrammatic 
transcription in line with the current pronunication. The latest date for the use of 
足尼 is 681, when the Yamana Mura monument was set up. It preserves the 
name 斯多多彌足禰 Sitatami Sukune. A wooden document from the Fujiwara 
Palace (fl. 694–710) has a fragment of a name: □甘足尼 X-kamu Sukune, but 
it cannot be dated (MK 1526). Perhaps this usage fell out of use about the time 
the capital was moved to Nara in 710. The name 足奈 Sukuna is also seen in 
the Mino Census (702). Two variations of sukune appear in Shoku Nihongi: 足尼 
(773.5.7) and 足禰 (779.1.8). 

 

宿 


OJ: suku, suko OC: *suk 

LH: siuk EMC: sjuk GO: suku KN: siuku 

NOM: túc, tú SV: túc, tú SK: sywuk, sywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and is primarily used to transcribe the 
title sukune (宿禰). It is unclear why the usage was altered, unless it was to 
represent a change in the phonology. If 足尼 was really sok-nei as noted under 
the graph 足, then perhaps vowel-raising in Japanese led the court to update the 
spelling (sok > suk). 

There are a number of other examples where the final -k appears to have 
been used to preface a following velar-initial syllable. Consider these examples: 
宿久波賣 Sukupamye, 宿古太賣 Sukwodamye, and 宿古代賣 Sukwodemye 
(all from the Chikuzen Census of 702), as well as 宿古弖賣 Sukwotemye (from 
the Atago District Izumo Village Shrine record of 726). Several excavated 
mokkan have been preserved a number of names with this phonogram: 宿奈麻呂 
Sukunamaro (MK 2074), □原宿麻呂 XPARA Sukumaro (MK 2111), and 宿奈 
女 SukunaMYE (MK 1856). 

Ōno mentions a few examples where the reading is suko instead of suku 
(1962:452), 宿太 Sukoda and 宿提 Sukode, but it is possible that these are 
abbreviations of the male versions of the female versions seen in the Chikuzen 
Census. It is not clear, so I leave it as is. 

 

叔 


OJ: suku OC: *nhuk 

LH: śuk EMC: śjuk GO: suku KN: siuku 

NOM: thúc SV: thúc SK: sywuk 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It appears in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu, 
writing the name 蘇我馬古叔尼 Swoga UMAkwo Sukune. 

 

淑 


OJ: suku OC: *diuk 

LH: dźuk EMC: źjuk GO: ziuku KN: siuku 

NOM: NA SV: thục SK: sywuk 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, appearing once in an Izumo Provincial 
Financial document preserved in the Shōsōin and dated 734: 小野臣淑奈麻呂 
WONWO OMI Sukunamaro. 

 

駿 


OJ: suru OC: *tsjuns < *tsur-s§ 

LH: tsuinh EMC: tsjwenh GO: siun KN: siun 

NOM: NA SV: tuấn SK: cywun, sywun 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, and perhaps earlier, due to the 
preservation of -r-. The sole example of this graph is the toponyms 駿河 
Suruga. The earliest attestation of this usage appears in Nihon shoki. Kujiki 
transcribes suruga as 珠流河国, attesting to the medial -ru-. There is a fragment 
of a wooden document from the Fujiwara Capital ruins (fl. 694–710) which 
contains 駿度之子 ‘the son of Surudwo’ (MK 3465). 

 

蘇 


OJ: swo OC: *sŋâ 

LH: sɑ > sɔ EMC: suo GO: so KN: so 

NOM: to, tô SV: tô, tồ, lộ SK: swo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in Wei zhi in the toponyms 対 
蘇 *tos-sɔ, 蘇奴 *sɔ-nɔ, and 華奴蘇奴 *wa-nɔ-sɔ-nɔ. This graph also appears 
on the Kwangkaytho stele: 蘇効城 *swokwo fortress, 南蘇城 *namswo 
fortress. This phonogram also appears in a peninsular name quoted in Nihon 
shoki: 蘇那曷叱知, glossed as Swonakasiti. 

While this phonogram does not appear in the Suiko era corpus, that may 
simply reflect the dearth of material. The representation for the active volcano 
Mount Aswo is found in the Chinese record, Sui shu (ca. 656), as 阿蘇, a usage 
likely taken from the Japanese, again suggesting that the use of 蘇 for swo 
originated before the Suiko era. 

The phonogram 蘇 is later found in the liturgies: 噪岐、古語云蘇蘇伎 
“ ‘Clamor’ in the old tongue is swoswoki” (NT 8). This phonogram appears a 
few times on mokkan: 安蘇郡 Aswo District (MK 3548), 物部麻蘇売 
MONONOBYE Maswomye (MK 1707), 加夜評阿蘇里 Kaya Village Aswo 
Hamlet (MK 21). 

This phonogram was primarily used to transcribe swo in Kojiki, as these 
examples attest: 於天浮橋宇岐士摩理蘇理多多斯弖 AME [NO] UKIPASI NI 
ukizimari swori tatasite ‘from the floating bridge of heaven he ascended up to 
the floating island and stood there…’ (KG). 

KK 46 

美知能斯理 miti no siri The maiden of Kohada 

古波陀袁登賣波 kwopada wotomye pa from behind the path 

阿良蘇波受 araswopazu does not resist me, 

泥斯久袁斯敍母 nesiku wo si zo mo but has slept with me. 

宇流波志美意母布 urupasimi omopu How pure is her heart. 


This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, once in the annotational notes, 
and eight times in the poetry: 送糞此云倶蘇摩屢 “ ‘Spread dung’ is read 
kuswomaru” (NSG). 

NSK 102 

夜酒瀰志斯 yasumisisi In the heavenly 

和餓於朋耆瀰能 wa ga opo kimi no eighty [rays of] sunshine where 

訶勾理摩須 kakurimasu my great lord hides, 

阿摩能椰蘇河礙 ama no yaswokage who rules in peace— 

異泥多々須 idetatasu if you go out and 

瀰蘇羅烏瀰禮麼 miswora wo mireba look at the august sky, 

豫呂豆余珥 yorodu yo ni for ten thousand reigns 

訶勾志茂餓茂 kakusi mogamo may it remain as is, splendid. 

This phonograms appears in Man’yōshū to transcribe swo 120 times. 

MYS 157 

神山之 MIWA YAMA NO The hemp offerings hung 

山邊真蘇木綿 YAMApye MAswo YUPU in the vicinity of Mount Miwa 

短木綿 MIZIKA YUPU are short paper offerings. 

如此耳故尓 KAKU NOMWI YUWE ni Though they are thus short 

長等思伎 NAGAKU to OMOPIki I will long think of her. 

 

巷 


OJ: swo OC: *ɡrôŋh 

LH: ɡɔŋh EMC: ɣåŋh GO: gou KN: kau 

NOM: NA SV: hạng SK: hang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The use of this phonogram is somewhat 
enigmatic, because the usage appears to be logographic in nature, but it is not 
readily clear what the relation is. For the time being I view this usage as a 
kungana. On the surface, one is tempted to believe that 巷 ‘lane, fork in a road’ 
reflects OJ swo, but no such known word exists. Another possibility is that 巷 is 
a graphic abbreviation for another phonogram used to transcribe swo. As Ōno 
notes (1962:53), some have theorized that the rendition with 巷 is really a 
mistake for 楚 or even 麤, but Kujiki writes the Swoga name as 巷宜, showing 
the antiquity of the rendition (宜 is LH ŋɨai representing pre-OJ *ga-i, while 
EMC ŋi representing OJ gwi). There is ample proof that this usage is archaic. In 
the record of origins in possession of the Gangōji Temple, the following 
rendition appear: 巷宜名伊那米大臣 “Swoga, named Great Minister Iname.” 
Iname’s name is also found written as 巷哥名伊奈米大臣 “Swoga, named 
Great Minister Iname.” Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu contains this quote from a nolonger 
extant cloth inscription: 巷奇大臣名伊奈米足尼 “Great Minister Swoga, 
named Iname Sukune.” Here are three different ways to spell the same name, but 
all three use 巷 to transcribe the initial swo. There is one example of this on a 
mokkan: 巷宜部刀由弥 SwogaBYE Twoyumi (MK 196). 

Ōno (1962:54) claims: “It is unthinkable that this graphic usage is related to 
Chinese or Korean orthography.” I hesitate to sweep continental influence aside 
so easily, but for the time being I leave the question open, and place the 
phonogram/kungana here. 

Because this phonogram only appears in the spelling of the Swoga family 


name, it is quite possible that this is an idiosyncratic usage, perhaps based on the 
possible peninsular origins of the family. I propose the following theory as a 
possible solution: Sura in some dialects of Ryūkyūan means ‘lineage,’ and this 
goes back to an earlier *sora. If this word underlies the usage of 巷 ‘fork in the 
road, as genealogy branches off,’ then perhaps the following development 
occurred: *sora > *sura > *sura > swo. 

 

嗽 


OJ: swo OC: *sôkh 

LH: soh EMC: səu GO: su, soku KN: sou, soku 

NOM: NA SV: sứu SK: swu, sak 

Usage / History: 

This is a rare phonogram, and the Sino-Vietnamese reading is unclear, so I 
have relied on a homophone. Mineya (1972:66) notes that the SV reading of a 
homophonous graph, 漱, is sứu. As the Sino-Japanese and Korean point out, 
there are two readings for this graph. Notice that a typical Han-Viet Tu-Dien 
records the reading of 漱 as sâu. Miyake (p.c.) notes, “SV sâu for 漱 seems to 
be a compromise reading blending the s of sứu with the rhyme of tấu. SV thâu 
for 漱 is a garbling of theoretical (and at one time existent?) tấu with the initial 
of 束 thuc. 嗽 LMC *səw` should result in SV tâu.” For the time being, I have 
relied on Mineya’s reading. 

It is interesting that by the time of Early Middle Chinese, this graph (嗽) 
would have represented otsu-rui /so/, but in the earlier, Later Han times, it had an 
overt rounded vowel. This attests to the antiquity of the rendition; however, as no 
other examples exist in our corpus, I place this phonogram in the EJS. The only 
extant example of this usage comes from an inscription on a halo of a Buddhist 
statue. That inscription contains the name of the Swoga family, written as 嗽加. 

 

宗 


OJ: swo OC: *tsûŋ 

LH: tsouŋ EMC: tsouŋ GO: so KN: sou 

NOM: tông, tong SV: tong SK: cwong 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, and appears as early as the Suiko era 
corpus. This phonogram appears twice in the biographic work, Jōgū shōtoku hōō 
teisetsu, both times to write the name of the powerful Minister Swoga no Iname 
Sukune 宗我稲目足尼大臣. Other early Nara era documents write the Swoga 
family name as 宗我, 宗宜, or 宗何. 

Kojiki also preserves proper names written with 宗: 針間阿宗君 PARIMA 
Aswo KIMI (KG), 宗賀稲目宿禰大臣 Minister Swoga INAME Sukune (KG), 
and 宗賀之倉王 Prince Swoga NO KURA (KG). 

Man’yōshū contains a number of examples of this graph: 

MYS 3087 

真菅吉 MASUGE YOSI True sedge is good— 

宗我乃河原尓 swoga no KAPAPARA ni like the constant calling of plovers 

鳴千鳥 NAKU TIDORI on the riverbed of the Soga River 

間無吾背子 MANASI WA GA SEKWO I am longing for you, 

吾戀者 A GA KWOPURAKU PA unceasingly, my beloved. 


素 


OJ: swo OC: *sâh 

LH: sɑh > sɔh EMC: suoh LMC: suə GO: so KN: su 

NOM: tố SV: tố SK: swo 

Usage / History: 

The phonogram 素 is used to transcribe two different syllables, swo and su. 
When representing swo it belongs to the LJS. It appears twice in the annotational 
notes, and five times in the poetry in Nihon shoki: 素珥山 Mount Swoni (NSG). 

NSK 18 

瀰磨紀異利寐胡播揶 mimakwi iribikwo paya Oh, Mimaki Iribiko! 

飫廼餓烏塢 ono ga wo wo You play with a princess, 

志齊務苔 sisemu to not even knowing that 

農殊末句志羅珥 nusumaku sirazi someone is secretly 

比売那素寐殊望 pimye naswobisu mo planning to take your life. 

This phonogram is also a primary graph in Man’yōshū to transcribe swo, 
used three times in the logographic portions of the anthology, but 16 times in the 
phonogrammatic sections: 

MYS 3604 

妹我素弖 IMWO ga swode It has been a long time since 

和可礼弖比左尓 wakarete pisa ni I parted with the sleeve of 

奈里奴礼杼 narinuredo my beloved, but has there been 

比登比母伊毛乎 pitopi mo imwo wo even one day that I have 

和須礼弖於毛倍也 wasurete omope ya forgotten to think of her? 

 

祖 


OJ: swo OC: *tsâʔ 

LH: tsɑʔ > tsɔʔ EMC: tsuoʔ GO: so KN: so 

NOM: tổ, tỏ SV: tổ SK: cwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in various personal names 
preserved in various Shōsōin documents: 祖古比麻呂 Swokwopi Maro, 彌祖 
咋萬呂 Miswo KUPI Maro, and 調乎具祖 TUKWI Woguswo. 

This phonogram also appears a three times in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 4389 

志保不尼乃 sipopune no Like the whitecaps that 

弊古祖志良奈美 pye kwoswo siranami suddenly crash over the bow 

尓波志久母 nipasiku mo of the tide-ship, 

於不世他麻保加 opusetamapo ka I was suddenly called away, 

於母波弊奈久尓 omopapyenaku ni though I had not expected it. 

 

泝 


OJ: swo OC: *sŋâkh 

LH: sɑh > sɔh EMC: suoh LMC: suə GO: su KN: so 

NOM: NA SV: tố SK: swo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears only once in the poetry in 
Nihon shoki: 


NSK 83 

伊儺武斯盧 inamusiro The willow growing along 

呵簸泝比野儺擬 kapaswopi yanagwi the banks of the river bends 

寐逗愈凱麼 midu yukeba with the flow of the water. 

儺弭企於己陀智 nabiki okwitati Fluttering or standing tall 

曾能泥播宇世儒 sono ne pa usezu the roots remain unchanged. 

 

麻 


OJ: swo OC: *mrâi 

LH: mai EMC: ma GO: ma KN: ma 

NOM: ma, mà SV: ma SK: ma 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, where 麻 ‘hemp’ suggests to the reader Old Japanese 
swo ‘hemp.’ This usage is preserved in personal names in Nihon shoki.The only 
example in Shoki is the Mononobe chief, 大綜麻杵 OPOPESWOKI. 

 

十 


OJ: swo OC: *ɡip 

LH: dźip EMC: źjəp GO: zifu KN: sifu 

NOM: sập, thập SV: thập SK: sip 

Usage / History: 

This kungana,十 ‘ten,’ calls to mind Old Japanese swo ‘tens.’ This simple 
graphic association appears rather early in the extant records. The earliest known 
usage dates from 702, and appears in the Mino census: 八十麻呂 YASWO 
Maro. A Tsuchigumo woman named 八十女 YASWOMYE appears in Hizen 
fudoki, but some scholars believe this simply means ‘eighty shamanistic woman.’ 

This use of 十 also appears in Kojiki, Nihon shoki, and Man’yōshū, 
illustrating that this rendition likely originated in the Asuka era. Man’yōshū 
contains various words with 十, but most examples are of one specific usage: 
MASWOKAGAMI (真十鏡) ‘true-ten mirror,’ sometimes interpreted as a clear 
mirror. 

 

追馬 



OJ: swo OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: NA GO: NA KN: NA 

NOM: NA SV: NA SK: NA 

Usage / History: 

This is a interesting logographic usage based on Chinese grammar. The 
predicate here means ‘shoo away a horse,’ suggesting to the reader what one says 
when s/he shoos away a horse. There is a poem in Man’yōshū that provides clear 
evidence for this usage of swo: 

MYS 3451 

左奈都良能 sanatura no I planted millet on 

乎可尓安波麻伎 woka ni apa maki the hill of Sanatsura— 

可奈之伎我 kanasiki ga even if my beloved’s 

古麻波多具等毛 kwoma pa tagu tomo colt should eat the millet 

和波素登毛波自 wa pa swo to mo pazi I will not shoo it away. 

The final stanza wa pa swo to mo pazi literally means I will not chase it away 
by saying ‘swo’ (which is close to English ‘shoo’). This usage of 追馬 only 
appears twice in Man’yōshū; the following is one example. 


MYS 2645 

宮材引 MIYAGWI PIKU Like the workers 

泉之追馬喚犬二 IDUMI NO SWOMA ni at Izumi Soma 

立民乃 TATUTAMI no cutting lumber for the palace, 

息時無 YASUMU TOKI NAKU I have no time to do anything 

戀渡可聞 KWOPWI WATARU kamo but continue to long for you. 


T 

 

 

多 



OJ: ta OC: *tâi 

LH: tɑi > tɑ EMC: tâ GO: ta KN: ta 

NOM: đa, đơ SV: đa SK: ta 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in Wei zhi in the following 
title, 多模 *tamɔ. This graph also appears on several inscriptions in Paekche. 
On the inscription marking the grave of King Munyeng of Paekche is the name 
多利 *tari. Also, on the Buddhist stone tower of Uysan-wangkung (益山王宮) 
is 阿耨多羅 anutara which represents Sanskrit anuttara ‘unparalleled.’ 

This phonogram is also used in Korean names recorded in Nihon shoki: 多沙 
城 Tasa Fortress, 多羅 land of Tara, 末多王 Prince Mata, 意多郎 Otara 
(man from Paekche), 斯那奴阿比多 Sinanwo Apita (Japanese name spelled in 
a Paekche record), 多沙津 Port of Tasa, 己能末多干岐 Kono Mata Kanki, 
多多羅原 Tatara Plain, 那多利 Natari (name of a Japanese person, born on 
the peninsula), 国雖多 Koksuwita (man from Paekche). 

This phonogram also appears in the oldest inscriptions in Japan. On the 
Inariyama tumulus sword inscription appears the following names: 多加利足尼 
Takari Sukune, 多加披次獲居 Takapesi Waka, 多沙鬼獲居 Tasakwi Waka. 
It is very interesting that many of these Japanese names recorded on the sword 
have similar renditions as the Paekche usages preserved in Nihon shoki. 

Clearly this phonogram was the most popular for representing ta. In the 
Suiko era corpus this graph is used for names such as 多米王 Prince Tame, 加 
多夫 古 臣 Katapukwo OMI, 怒 那 久 良 布 刀多麻 斯 支 天 皇 Great King 
Nunakura Putwotama Siki, 支多斯比売 Princess Kitasi Pimye, 多至波奈等已 
比乃弥己等 Tatibana Toyopi no Mikoto, and others. This phonogram appears 
often in the liturgies: 御服波明多閇照多閇、和多閇荒多閇爾仕奉弖 MISO pa 
AKARUtape TERU tape NIKItape ARAtape ni TUKAPEMATURIte “As for the clothing 
(we will make) fabric that is brilliant, glowing, soft, and coarse…” (NT 2). This 
phonogram appears on many mokkan: 多可夜万takayama ‘a high mountain’ 
(MK 551), 己亥年十二月二方評波多里・大豆五斗 ‘In the twelfth month of 
the year tutinoto wi (699) Pata Hamlet in PUTAKATA District (presented 
tribute) of five PAKWO (about half a bushel) of beans’ (MK 1173), and 阿支波 
支乃之多波毛美智 aki paki no / sita pa mwomidi ‘The lower leaves of the 
autumn bush clover are crimson…’ (MKK 31:28). This final example has the 
same beginning as MYS 2205. 

This phonogram continued to be used in later records, like Kojiki, Nihon shoki, 
Man’yōshū, and others: 於名帶字謂多羅斯 “In a name, the graph 帶 ‘belt’ is 
read tarasi” (KG), 訓立云多知 “The graph 立 ‘standing’ is read tati” (KG), 訓 
立云多多志 “(Here) the graph 立 ‘standing (honorific)’ is read tatasi” (KG). 

KK 15 

夜麻登能 yamato no Of the seven 

多加佐士怒袁 takasazinwo wo maidens who traverse 


那那由久 nana yuku the Takasaji Moor 

袁登賣杼母 wotomyedomo In Yamato— 

多禮袁志摩加牟 tare wosi makamu of these who will you wed? 

In Nihon shoki this phonogram appears in 28 annotational notes, and 108 
times in the poetry: 少童、此云和多都美 “少童 ‘few-youth,’ this is read 
watatumi” (NSG), 秉炬、此云多妃 “秉炬 ‘take-fire,’ this is read tapwi 
‘torch’ ” (NSG), 玉籤、此云多摩倶之 “玉籤 ‘jewel-bamboo tally,’ this is read 
tamakusi ‘spiritually endowed branch” (NSG). 

NSK 44 

瀰儺曾虚赴 minasokopu Who will look after 

於瀰能烏苔咩烏 omi no wotomye wo this maiden, my subject 

多例揶始儺播務 tare yasinapamu catching fish? 

This phonogram appears in Man’yōshū 1252 times, as these examples 
demonstrate: 迦多知波 katati pa ‘as for the shape…’ (MYS 794); 紀利多知 
和多流 kwiri tati wataru ‘the mist rises and spreads out’ (MYS 799), and 麻佐 
礼留多可良 masareru takara ‘a jewel that is above others’ (MYS 803). 

Finally, the following are found on wooden documents (mokkan) that contain 
dates: 辛卯年十月尾治国知多評 “Tenth month of 691, WOPARI Province, Tita 
District” (MK 166); 尾張国智多郡番賀郷花井里丸部龍麻呂・・・神亀四年 
十月七日 “WANIBYE TATUmaro of the PANAWI Hamlet of Paniga Village in the 
Tita District of WOPARI Province…(dated seventh day of the 10th month of 727, 
MK 319);” 多米里多米部麿・・・・和銅六年 “TameBYE Maro of Tame 
Hamlet…713.” 多 比 真 人 ・ ・ ・ ・ 和 銅 七 年 九 月 廿 五 日 “Tapi 
MABITO…twenty-fifth day of the ninth month, 714” (unnumbered tablet). 

The simplified form of 多 is the origin of katakana タ. 

 

哆 



OJ: ta OC: *d-lai or k-hlaiʔ *[t-l̥ ]ajʔ § 

LH: tśhɑiʔ EMC: tśhjeʔ GO: ta KN: si 

NOM: đe, đớ, đứ SV: xỉ SK: chya, chi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS, which fact seems odd if we consider 
that Japanese character dictionaries consistently claim that the Go-on is si. 
However, Hokekyō ongi preserves many glosses of this phonogram as ta (Ogura 
1995.2:1184–1196). Also, in Chữ Nôm we find 殯 as đớ and 捶 is đứa both 
dental-initial. Baxter and Sagart (2014:270) also reconstruct this with intial *t-. 

One toponym with this phonogram is preserved in a Paekche name quoted in 
Nihon shoki: 上哆唎 Okoshi Tari ‘Upper Tari.’ This phonogram also appears 
four times in the annotational notes, and 14 times in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 
韴靈、此云赴屠能瀰哆磨 “ ‘(The powerful sword) Futsu no Mitama’ is read 
putu no mitama” (NSG). 

NSK 70 

於裒企彌烏 opokimi wo They exiled the great ruler 

志摩珥波夫利 sima ni paburi to a distant island. 

布儺阿摩利 punaamari The boat will be full, 

異餓幣利去牟鋤 igapyeri komu zo and she will return to me. 

和餓哆哆瀰由梅 wa ga tatami yume So purify all the mats. 

去等烏許曾 koto wo koso ‘The mats’ are my words, 


哆多瀰等異泮梅 tatami to ipame but that is not what I meant. 

和餓菟摩烏由梅 wa ga tuma wo yume Stay clean and pure, my spouse. 

 

大 


OJ: ta OC: *dâs 

LH: dɑh, das EMC: dâih GO: da, dai KN: ta, tai 

NOM: đại SV: đại, thái SK: ta, tay, thay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS, appearing on various inscriptions 
preserved on the Korean peninsula. On the Kwangkaytho stele, the graph appears 
in the following names: 大朱留王 King *tasuru, 大山韓城 *tasankan fortress. 
It should be mentioned that 大 may actually be a logogram here, rather than a 
phonogram, meaning ‘great.’ As it is impossible to be sure without corroborating 
evidence I leave 大 here. This phonogram also appears in Koryŏgi: 次大使者、 
比正四品、一名大奢, “Next is the Great Envoy, which is comparable to the 
Senior Fourth Rank, also known as tasa.” (Takeuchi 1977:34). 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, in quotes from Paekche 
records: 大不孫 Tapuson, 大市頭 Tasitu. 

There are many examples in the Shōsōin with 大, but as Ōno points out 
(1962:111), these may be nothing more than abbreviations of 太. Onoda Mitsuo 
(1977:11–12) has carefully examined scribal tendencies when writing 大 or 太 
in the various texts of Kojiki and notes, “In the ancient manuscripts, scribes wrote 
大 or 太 freely with almost no distinction between the two.…It has been 
shown…that from the earliest times in China there has been an overlapping usage 
of 大 and 太….This is also true of the Korean peninsula.” 

There is one example of 大 representing ta in the annotational notes of 
Book 26 of Nihon shoki: 田身山名。云大務 “ ‘田身’ is the name of a 
mountain. It is read tamu” (NSG). The graph 大 was generally avoided in Japan 
as a phonogram because it was so useful as a logogram ‘great.’ 

 

太 


OJ: ta OC: *thâs 

LH: thɑs EMC: thaih GO: tai KN: tai 

NOM: thái SV: thái SK: thay 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. For an explanation of the problems with 
distinguishing between 大 and 太 see the explanation under 大 ta. Because of 
the textual difficulties in determining when 大 is intended and not 太, I place 
this phonogram here. 

As Ōno (1962:166) explains, this graph was used to write da, but because it 
was only a few strokes, many scribes used it to transcribe ta. This phonogram 
appears on the Kwangkaytho stele: 加太羅谷 *ka-tas-ra valley. It also appears 
in the Paekche name of a monastery builder preserved in Nihon shoki: 太良未太 
Taramwida. The record of the origin of the Gangōji Temple contains the same 
name as 丈羅未大, glossed as Daramwida. However, as 太 and 丈 are easily 
confused, it is highly probable that 丈 is simply a mistake for 太. 

A mokkan from the Fujiwara Palace (fl. 694–710) contains the name 大伴直 
可太末呂 OPOTOMO ATAPI Katamaro (or Kadamaro? MKK 5:86). 

Shoku Nihongi contains the following examples: 伊太祁曾 Itakyeso Shrine 


(702.2.22), 巨勢朝臣太益須 Kose ASOMI Tayasu (706.7.11), and 佐渡國雜太 
郡 Sadwo Province Sapata District (721.4.20). 

The cursive form of this phonogram yields hiragana た. 

 

侈 


OJ: ta OC: *d-lai or *k-hlaiʔ *t-l̥ ajʔ § 

LH: tśhai EMC: tśhjeʔ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: xỉ, xí, xẫy SV: xỉ, xí SK: chi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, appearing once in the Suiko era corpus, 
in the genealogy of Prince Shōtoku: 久波侈女王 Princess Kupata. As Ōno 
(1962:54) argues, using this graph to transcribe ta may be based on Old Chinese 
phonology. Schuessler (2007:187) provides two possible Old Chinese 
reconstructions, but as Baxter and Sagart demonstrate, this was *t- initial at the 
OC stage (2014:270). 

 

他 


OJ: ta OC: *lhâi 

LH: thai EMC: thâ GO: ta KN: ta 

NOM: tha, thà, thơ SV: tha SK: tha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, appearing in Kojiki and Man’yōshū. 
This phonogram appears once in the poetry of Kojiki, and once in a toponym: 御 
陵在沙紀之多他那美也 ‘His august burial tumulus is located at Tatanami of 
Sakwi’ (KG). 

KK 66 

賣杼理能 myedori no Princess Medori, 

和賀意富岐美能 wa ga opokimi no my royal maiden, 

於呂須波多 orosu pata who will wear 

他賀多泥呂迦母 ta ga tanero kamo that fabric that you weave? 

This phonogram also appears five times in Book 20 of Man’yōshū. 

MYS 4390 

牟浪他麻乃 muratama no Having made a firm promise, 

久留尓久枳作之 kuru ni kugi sasi as a door pivoting on a nail— 

加多米等之 katametosi like a cluster of jewels, 

以母加去々里波 imo ga kokoro pa my beloved’s heart will 

阿用久奈米加母 aywokuname kamo probably not be moved. 

 

託 


OJ: ta, taku OC: *thâk 

LH: thak EMC: thâk GO: taku KN: taku 

NOM: thác SV: thác SK: thak 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. There is one instance of this in Nihon 
shoki, 託基 read Takwi, but it seems fairly certain that the velar-final 託 was 
used to introduce the velar initial 基. This is also true of the example in Harima 
fudoki: 託賀郡 Taka District. Izumo fudoki preserves one name: 託和社 
Takuwa Shrine. 

Man’yōshū contains only one example of this phonogram. 


MYS 395 

託馬野尓 takUMANWO ni The violet foliage 

生流紫 OPOru MURASAKI growing on Takuma Moor— 

衣染 KINU NI SIME I dyed my cloth in it, 

未服而 IMADA KIZU SITE but before I could wear the robes 

色尓出来 IRO ni IDENIKERI people already knew about it. 

Some scholars want to read 託馬 as tukuma, but that seems unwarranted. 
Consider that a number of wooden documents (mokkan) contain the place name 
肥後国託麻郡 PWIGO Province Takuma District, which has a reading tradition 
of takuma (MK 302, MKK 11:19). 

This phonogram also appears three times in Hizen fudoki, used to represent 
the toponym 託羅 Ta(ku)ra. A modern place name of Tara still exists, making 
scholars believe this set should be read tara, but consider, as Ōno points out 
(1962:452), that Wamyōshō contains the place name 託羅 found in the province 
of Awa and it is read takara. I propose that the Hizen place name was takura and 
as time went on -ku- devoiced and dropped. 

 

黨 


OJ: ta OC: *tâŋʔ 

LH: tɑŋʔ EMC: tâŋʔ LMC: taŋ GO: tau KN: tau 

NOM: đảng SV: đảng SK: tang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears once in the early section of 
Nihon shoki’s poetry: 

NSK 4 

憶企都茂播 okitu mo pa It comes to the shore 

陛爾播譽戻耐母 pye nipa yoredomo the seaweed in the offing; 

佐禰耐據茂 sanedoko mo but my wife comes not— 

阿黨播怒介茂譽 atapanu kamo yo refusing to give me a bed. 

播磨都智耐理譽 pamatutidori yo Ah! The plovers on the beach! 

 

陀 


OJ: ta OC: NA 

LH: dai EMC: dâ LMC: tɦa GO: da KN: ta 

NOM: đà SV: đà SK: tha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram has a variant form, 陁 (see below). 

 

陁 


OJ: ta OC: draiʔ 

LH: ḍiaiʔ EMC: ḍjeʔ LMC: tɦa GO: da KN: ta 

NOM: đà SV: đà SK: tha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears 16 times in the annotational 
notes, and 38 times in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 碩田此云於保岐陁 “ ‘Large 
field’ is read opokita” (NSG), 立出此云陁豆豆 “ ‘Stand and leave’ is read 
tatudu” (NSG). 


NSK 113 

耶麻鵝播爾 yamagapa ni There are two mandarin ducks 

烏志賦頴都威底 wosi putatu wite at the mountain stream, 

陁虞毘預倶 tagupi yoku paired off so nicely. 

陁虞陛屢伊慕乎 tagupyeru imo wo Who has taken my beloved 

多例柯威爾雞武 tare ka winikyemu who paired off so well with me? 

 

柁 


OJ: ta OC: thraiʔ 

LH: ṭiaiʔ EMC: ṭhjeʔ LMC: tɦa GO: da KN: ta 

NOM: đà, xà SV: đạ SK: tha 

Usage / History: 

See this phonogram under its variant, 柂 (see below). 

 

柂 


OJ: ta OC: thraiʔ 

LH: ṭiaiʔ EMC: ṭhjeʔ LMC: tɦa GO: da KN: ta 

NOM: đà, xà SV: đạ SK: tha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. The original graph was 舵, later 
simplified to 柁, which was then altered to 柂. This phonogram appears six 
times in the annotational notes, and 27 times in Nihon shoki poetry: 木蓮子、此 
云伊柂寐 “ ‘The name Itabi’ is read itabwi” (NSG). 

NSK 78 

柯武柯噬能 kamukaze no By the divine-wind swept ocean 

伊制能 ise no of Ise Province 

伊制能奴能 ise no nwo no on the plain in Ise 

娑柯曳嗚 sakaye wo a man cuts the branches 

伊裒甫流柯枳底 ipo puru kakite that have grown so thickly. 

志我都矩屢麻泥爾 si ga tukuru made ni He cuts so many branches 

飫裒枳瀰爾 opokimi ni they cannot be counted, 

柯頴倶 kataku all for his lord— 

都柯陪麻都羅武騰 tukapematuramu to building a strong edifice. 

倭我伊能致謀 wa ga inoti mo He has continued to say 

那我倶母鵝騰 nagaku mo ga to that his great desire 

伊比志柂倶彌皤夜 ipisi takumi paya was to live a long life. 

阿柂羅陁倶彌皤夜 atara takumi paya Alas, that pitiful carpenter. 

 

駄 


OJ: ta OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: da LMC: tɦa GO: da KN: ta 

NOM: NA SV: đà SK: tha 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears eight times in the poetry of 
Nihon shoki: 

NSK 99 

柯羅屨儞嗚 kara kuni wo No matter what people 

以柯儞輔居等所 ika ni pu koto so may say about our land of Kara, 

梅豆羅古枳駄樓 medurakwo kitaru Mezurako has arrived. 

武哿左屨樓 mukasakuru Passing through the distant 


以祇能和駄唎嗚 iki no watari wo channel of Iki 

梅豆羅古枳駄樓 medurakwo kitaru Mezurako has at last arrived. 

 

田 


OJ: ta OC: *lîn 

LH: den EMC: dien GO: demu KN: ten 

NOM: điền, ruộng SV: điền SK: tyen 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to the reader’s mind OJ ta ‘cultivated field.’ It is difficult 
to date this usage, as it appears as early as the Suiko era corpus, but this might 
actually show contamination, with a mixture of styles: 小治田 WOPARITA, 田 
宮中比彌 TAMIYA NAKA pimye Princess Tamiya Naka, 他田宮 WOSATA 
Palace. 

This kungana also appears in the early Taihō census (702): 栗栖田 
KURISUTA, 大田 OPOTA, 黒田 KURWOTA, 古田賣 KwoTAmye (or 
possibly PURUTAmye), 伊波田賣 IpaTAmye. 

This usage appears in Kojiki fairly frequently, especially in names recorded 
in Book 1 of the work: 姓稗田名阿禮 “(an individual) with the family 
association name of PIYETA and having the name of Are” (KG), 田寸津比賣 
TAKITU Pimye (KG). 

According to Ōno (1977:803) there are some 536 examples with 田 as ta in 
Nihon shoki: 吾田邑 ATA Village (NSG), and 城田 KWITA (NSG). There 
are over 100 examples of this kungana in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 83 

海底 WATA NO SOKO From the bottom of the sea 

奥津白波 OKITU SIRANAMI white caps on the offing— 

立田山 TATUTA YAMA when will I cross over 

何時鹿越奈武 ITU KA KWOYEnamu Mount Tatsuta, to see 

妹之當見武 IMWO GA ATARI MImu things around my beloved? 

 

手 


OJ: ta OC: *nhuʔ or *hjuʔ 

LH: śuʔ EMC: śjəuʔ GO: su KN: siuu 

NOM: thủ SV: thủ SK: sywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram was used as a kungana, suggesting to the reader the OJ 
bound form ta- ‘hand.’ This graph is first found in the census records of the 
Taihō (702) era: 手纒賣 TAMAKWImye, 手束賣 TASOKUmye. It also 
appears in Kojiki in the name 手白髪郎女 TASIRWOKA [NO] IRATUMYE. 
Examples in names in Nihon shoki include: 手研耳命 TAGISI MIMI [NO] 
MIKOTO and 手白香皇女 Princess TASIRWOKA. This usage only occurs at 
the beginning of names. 

There are eight examples of this kungana in Man’yōshū, and all occur at the 
beginning of a morpheme string. 

MYS 41 

釼著 KUSIRO TUKU Reminding one of arm ornaments— 

手節乃埼二 TAPUSI no SAKI ni at Cape Tafushi 

今日毛可母 KEPU mo ka mo are the people of the great palace 


大宮人之 OPOMIYAPITO NO out enjoying themelves today 

玉藻苅良武 TAMAMO KARUramu cutting the gem weed? 

 

當 


OJ: tagi OC: *tâŋ 

LH: taŋ EMC: tâŋ GO: tau KN: tau 

NOM: đang, đáng SV: đang, đáng SK: tang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS and appears in early renditions, but 
almost all are to represent the toponym 當麻 Tagima, but there are a number of 
exceptions. The scholarly tradition is that this phonogram can also represent ta, 
but as the following examples show, this graph was often used to anticipate the 
velar in the next syllable: 當藝志美美命 Tagisi Mimi [NO] MIKOTO, 當藝比古 
Tagi Pikwo, 當藝麻 Tagima, and 當岐麻 Tagima (all from Kojiki). In Shoku 
Nihongi we find 當耆皇女 Princess Tagi (698.9.10) and 福當連 Putagi [NO] 
MURAZI (761.3.15). 

 

宕 


OJ: tagi OC: *dâŋh 

LH: daŋh EMC: dâŋ LMC: tɦaŋ GO: dau KN: tau 

NOM: NA SV: đáng SK: thang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in Shoku Nihongi in the 
name 愛宕郡 Otagi District (780.4.26). 

 

宅 


OJ: taku OC: *drâk 

LH: ḍak EMC: ḍɐk LMC: trɦa:jk GO: daku KN: taku 

NOM: trạch SV: trạch SK: choyk 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This phonogram appears in Shoku 
Nihongi in the name 藤原宅美 PUDIPARA Takumi (771.11.25). Ōno (1962:452) 
mentions that at the end of Izumo fudoki is a section of addenda that includes the 
toponym 宅和 Takuwa, written as 宅波 Takupa in a variant manuscript, so he 
has set it aside for the time being. 

 

澹 


OJ: tama OC: *lâmʔ or *lâms 

LH: damʔ or damh EMC: dâmʔ LMC: tɦam GO: damu KN: tan 

NOM: NA SV: đạm SK: tam 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears in Izumo fudoki in the 
toponym 澹由比濱 Tamayupi Beach. The NKBT editor has this glossed as た 
ゆひ, but I do not know on what authority. As Ōno (1962:467) points out, other 
witnesses have 玉結濱 TAMAYUPI Beach. 

 

淡 


OJ: tama, tamu OC: *lâmʔ or *lâms 

LH: damʔ or damh EMC: dâmʔ LMC: tɦam GO: dan KN: tan 

NOM: đạm, đặm, đượm SV: đạm SK: tam 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and several examples appear in 
documents preserved in the Shōsōin: 志淡思郷 Sitamusi Village, 大伴淡等 
OPOTOMO Tabito (< Tam-pito representing prenasalization). There is also the 
name 多治比真人倓世 Tadipi MABITO Tamase (or Tamuse?). This is a rare 
example of 倓, so it is possible this is simply a variant of 淡, as the radical 氵 
written in cursive resembles 亻. 

In Harima fudoki we find 淡奈 志 Tamanasi, though there is some 
argument about the true reading. The NKBT editor has altered an original 淡奈 
志 to 談奈志 IPAnasi, but for now I have followed the critical text. 

 

倓 


OJ: tama OC: *lâm or *lâms 

LH: dam or damh EMC: dâm LMC: tɦam GO: dan KN: tan 

NOM: NA SV: đảm SK: tam 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram is likely a variant (a product of cursive writing?) of 淡 (see 
above). 

 

覃 


OJ: tami OC: *lə̂ m 

LH: dəm EMC: dậm LMC: tɦam GO: don KN: tan 

NOM: đầm SV: đàm SK: tam 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in two different spellings in 
Bingo fudoki: 球覃 and 救覃, both read Kutami. 

 

潭 


OJ: tami OC: *lə̂ m 

LH: dəm EMC: dậm LMC: tɦam GO: dan KN: tan 

NOM: đằm SV: đàm SK: tam 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears once in Izumo fudoki in 玖 
潭郷 Kutami Village. 

 

丹 


OJ: tani, tanu OC: *tân 

LH: tan EMC: tân GO: tamu KN: tan 

NOM: đan, đơn SV: đan, đơn SK: tan 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram is mainly confined to 
representing the toponym Tanipa 丹波 (Kojiki, Nihon shoki, Kujiki, and 
Man’yōshū). There is also the family name 丹治比 Tadipi, matching very 
nicely Old Japanese phonology, because we know the medial consonant was 
prenasalized: ta-ndi-pi, which is what 丹治比 actually represents: tan-di-pi. As 
time went on, this tri-graph was shortened to a digraph: 丹比 but continued to 
be read tadipi. Documents contained in the Shōsōin have the name 丹治 Tadi. 

Shoku Nihongi also contains the following: 志丹 Sitani (though some 
manuscripts have this glossed as sitanu, a personal name, 717.1.18), and 丹比 
Tadipi. 

 


旦 


OJ: tani OC: *tâns 

LH: tanh EMC: tânh GO: tamu KN: tan 

NOM: đán SV: đán SK: tan 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram is used to represent 
Tanipa 旦波 as found in a document found in the Shōsōin. 

 

但 


OJ: tani OC: *dânʔ 

LH: danʔ EMC: dânʔ LMC: tɦan GO: damu KN: tan 

NOM: đãn, đỡn SV: đán, đãn SK: tan 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It is used to represent Tanipa 但波 in 
the Izumo Otagi District Register of 726. It also is found in an Izumo tax record 
from 739: 但馬 Tadima, which is a shortened form of 但治馬 Tan-di-ma. 

 

檀 


OJ: tanwo, ta OC: *dân 

LH: dan EMC: dân LMC: tɦan GO: damu KN: tan 

NOM: đàn SV: đàn SK: tan 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in Nihon shoki in the name 
許勢朝臣辛檀努 Kose ASOMI Sitanwo (NSG). This same person is earlier 
found as 巨勢臣紫檀 Kose OMI Sitanwo (NSG). He also appears in Shoku 
Nihongi, with his name written as 志丹 Sitanwo (717.1.18). Different 
manuscripts have different readings for the graphs 檀 and 丹, but based on 
Nihon shoki’s single instance of -tanwo, I have kept that spelling throughout. 

 

答 


OJ: tapu OC: *tə̂ p 

LH: təp EMC: tập GO: tafu KN: tafu 

NOM: đáp SV: đáp SK: tap 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in Shoku Nihongi in 答他 
伊奈麻呂 Tapuda Inamaro (761.3.15). This same family name is found in a 
document from the Shōsōin: 答田 TapuDA and 答多 Tapuda. This usage also 
appears on a mokkan: 答志郷 Tapusi Village (MK 11411). 

 

塔 


OJ: tapu OC: NA 

LH: thap EMC: thâp GO: tafu KN: tafu 

NOM: tháp, thóp SV: tháp SK: thap 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in the Buzen census of 702 in 
the name 塔里 Tapuri and 塔勝 Tapusio, both which may be peninsular 
names. Other names found in documents in Shōsōin include 江沼塔麻呂 
YENUMA Tapumaro and 紀部塔万呂 KwiBYE Tapumaro. 

This phonogram also appears in one poem in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1089 

大海尓 OPOKI UMI ni Though there are 

嶋毛不在尓 SIMA mo ARANAKU ni no islands in the wide ocean 


海原 UNAPARA NO out on the sea-plain 

絶塔浪尓 TAYUtapu NAMI ni there are white clouds above 

立有白雲 TATERU SIRAKUMWO the towering waves. 

 

帶 


OJ: tara OC: *tâs *C.tʕa[t]-s § 

LH: tas EMC: tâi GO: tai KN: tai 

NOM: đái, đáy, đới SV: đái,đới SK: toi 

Usage / History: 

This kungana appears in Man’yōshū, and should call to mind obi ‘belt,’ but 
instead it must be read tara, likely a Paekche word for belt. This usage appears 
once in Man’yōshū in the following: 

MYS 443 

帶乳根乃 TARATINE no My august mother 

母命者 PAPA NO MIKOTO PA a suckling at her breast, 

齊忌戸乎 IPAPIPYE wo places wine cup of worship 

前坐置而 MAPYE NI SUWEOKITE in front of her…. 

 

達 


OJ: tata, tate, tati OC: *thât or *dât 

LH: that or dat EMC: thât or dât GO: dati KN:tati 

NOM: đạt, đặt, đật SV: đạt SK: tal 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in a Koguryŏ surname found 
in Nihon shoki: 達沙 Tatisa. There is also the name of an individual: 覩貨羅人 
乾豆波斯達阿 Genzu Hasidatia from Tokara. There is also the name 鞍部村主 
司馬達等 KURATUKURI SUGURI Simadatito, This last individual may be from 
Paekche. 

This phonogram is also found in names like 吉敷郡達理山 YOSIKI District 
Mount Tadari (730.3.13), 佐伯宿祢伊達 Sapeki Sukune Itate (785.7.17) in 
Shoku Nihongi. Harima fudoki also contains the name 因達 Idate, which comes 
from in-tate. 

 

鞮 


OJ: te OC: *tê or *dê 

LH: te, de EMC: tiei, diei GO: tai KN: tei 

NOM: NA SV: đề SK: tyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It is used in Wei zhi to transcribe the title 
of an auxiliary official: 奴佳鞮 *nɔ-ke-te. While this phonogram does not 
appear in any other Japanese record, other related graphs like 提堤題 are used 
to represent OJ te (see below). 

 

弖 


OJ: te OC: *tîʔ 

LH: teiʔ EMC: tiei GO: tei KN: tei 

NOM: đê SV: đê, để SK: tye 

Usage / History: 

Anciently there appears to have been two phonograms for te, 氐 and 弖, 
but I argue that these originate from the same graph, one actually a graphic 
variant (弖) of the other (氐). Chinese character dictionaries in Japan (kanwa 


jiten) label 弖 as a 国字 kokuji ‘native character,’ based on the arguments of 
some scholars (cf. Tōdō 1978:431, Kamata et al. 1987:337). It needs to be 
pointed out, however, that this graph is preserved on the Kwangkaytho stele in 
Koguryŏ, strongly suggesting that this altered form of graph at the very least 
came from the peninsula. See Kitagawa (1991:234) for a rubbing of this kanji. 

Both usages and their history are addressed here. Based on the available data, 
I place this phonogram in the PBS. There is one example of this graph on the 
Kwangkaytho stele: 幹弖利城 *ɡɨɑn-tei-li fortress. It is possible that the first 
graph 幹 represents *kən, as the graph 翰 is used to represent ‘large’ in a 
Paekche place name. Both graphs have mid, unrounded vowels. 

This phonogram also appears on the Eta Funayama tumulus sword 
inscription, in the name 无利弖 Murite. On the Inariyama tumulus sword 
inscription there appears the following two names: 弖巳加利獲居 *teyo-kariwaka, 
半弖比[垝] *pante-pi-(kwa-i). These data are important, because it is 
generally accepted that at this point in time (fifth century?) the Wa were mostly 
illiterate, and this inscription was likely transcribed by an immigrant from 
Paekche, and carved into the blade by a Wa swordsmith. 

Looking at the usages in Nihon shoki is also enlightening. Consider these 
data in Nihon shoki: 

 久氐 Kute, man from Paekche 奴氐大舎 Nute Tasa, a man from Silla 

 彌弖 Myite, a port in Paekche 弖礼 Tere, name of a fortress 

 牟弖 Mute, an official from Paekche 

Consider that all Nihon shoki manuscripts, other than Shaku Nihongi, record 
the first name Kute as 久氐. In the record of Tenchi, however, a Paekche official 
named Mute 牟弖 and a Paekche fortress, Tere 弖礼, are written with 弖 in 
all manuscripts, including Shaku Nihongi (Ienaga et al. 1986.2:361, Onoda 
1986:532). These renditions should first show that the phonogram 弖 was 
already being used on the Korean peninsula, and was taught by the Paekche to 
the Wa. This is further confirmed by the inscription on the Inariyama tumulus 
sword inscription, as noted above. Second, it would seem that there indeed were 
two different graphs for te. I submit, however, that 弖 is a cursive form of 氐. 

This phonogram also appears in the earliest recorded material in Japan, 
preserved in a Suiko-era inscription, that of the Gangōji Halo inscription: 奴加 
弖古 Nukatekwo, and 古弖古郎女 Kwotekwo IRATUMYE. This phonogram 
also appears in Jōgū shōtoku hōō teisetsu: 須加弖古女王 Princess Sukatekwo. 
It also appears in one poem in the same work: 

伊我留我乃 ikaruga no In Ikaruga springs water from 

止美能井乃美豆 tomi no WI no midu the fountain of Tomi. 

伊加奈久尓 ikanakuni If I had known she could not 

多義弖麻之母乃 tagete masimono live without that water, 

止美乃井能美豆 tomi no WI no midu I would have let her drink some. 

This phonogram also appears in the late Asuka liturgies: 高天原爾千木高知 
弖 TAKAMAPARA ni TIGWI TAKA SIRIte “raise the roof pillars to heaven” (NT 10), 
白弖 MAWOSIte “said, and…” (NT 1). This phonogram appears on several 
mokkan: 伊弖志 Itesi (MK 100), 佐 波 利弖 saparite ‘and obstruct…’ 
(unnumbered tablet). 

This phonogram is also the principal graph for representing te in Kojiki: 宇 


士多加礼許呂呂岐弖 uzi takare kororokite “maggots had gathered and were 
squirming, and…” (KG), 宇気比弖 ukepite “vowed, and…,” 伊多弖淤波受 
itate opazu “(he) did not get wounded…” (KG). 

KK 108 

斯本勢能 sipwose no Looking at the line of waves 

那袁理袁美禮婆 nawori wo mireba driven by the brisk tide, 

阿蘇毘久流 aswobikuru I see the fin 

志毘賀波多傳爾 sibi ga patade ni of a swimming tuna, 

都麻多弖理美由 tuma tateri miyu where my spouse-to-be stands. 

This phonogram is used 33 times in the poetry in Shoki: 

NSK 104 

斯那提流 sinateru Starving for want of food 

箇多烏箇夜摩爾 katawokayama ni on Mount Kataoka, 

伊比爾惠弖 ipi ni wete the shining hill, 

許夜勢屢 koyaseru how pitiful is that farmer 

諸能多比等阿波禮 sono tapito apare who has fallen. 

於夜那斯爾 oya nasi ni Surely you were not 

那禮奈理雞迷夜 narenarikyeme ya raised without parents. 

佐須陀氣能 sasu take no Do you have no lord, 

枳彌波夜那祇 kimi paya naki strong like bamboo? 

伊比爾惠弖 ipi ni wete Starving for want of food 

許夜勢留 koyaseru how pitiful is that farmer 

諸能多比等阿波禮 sono tapito apare who has fallen. 

This phonogram is the primary graph used in Man’yōshū to represent te, 
appearing roughly 655 times. 

MYS 806 

多都能馬母 tatu no MA mo How I want to obtain 

伊麻勿愛弖之可 ima mo ete sika even a dragon steed right now, 

阿遠尓与志 awo ni yosi in order to return 

奈良乃美夜古尓 nara no miyakwo ni to the Nara capital, 

由吉帝己牟丹米. yukite komu tame which is good in its greenery. 

 

天 


OJ: te OC: *thîn 

LH: then EMC: thien GO: temu KN: ten 

NOM: thiên SV: thiên SK: thyen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. There is one example of this 
phonogram on the Kwangkaytho stele: 仇天城 *ɡu-ten fortress. The final nasal 
is written in superscript because while it is possible that the language of Koguryŏ 
ignored the final, the possibility does exist that this name required the -n. 

This phonogram then appears in a toponym preserved in the documents of 
the Shōsōin: 天萬郷 Tema Village (in Haki Province). It is also used as a 
particle in the edicts preserved in Shoku Nihongi: 兵乎發朝庭乎傾動武止之天鈴印 
乎奪復皇位乎掠天先仁捨岐良比賜天之道祖我兄鹽燒乎皇位仁方定止云天官印乎押 
天天下乃諸國仁書乎散天告知之米 IKUSA wo OKOSI, MIKADWO wo KATABUKE 
UGOKASAmu to site SUZU ORITE wo UBAPI MATA MIKADWO [NO] KURAWI wo 
KSAWOPITE, SAKI ni SUTEkirapi TAMAPItesi PUNATWO ga E SIPOYAKI wo MIKADWO 


[NO] KURAWI nipa SADAMETU to IPIte TUKASA [NO] ORITE wo OSIte AME [NO] SITA 
no KUNIGUNI ni PUMI wo AKATIte TUGESIRAsime ‘(Nakamaro) raised troops, and 
tried to tip over the court, stole the relay bells and government signets, and tried 
to take the throne. Beforehand he said that he had established (Prince) Shihoyaki, 
the older brother of Funato. He pressed the official seal and distributed the 
document to the various provinces and let them know of his decision’ (SM 28). 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 3595 

安佐妣良伎 asabiraki When we rowed out 

許藝弖天久礼婆 kogidete kureba into the bay of Muko 

牟故能宇良能 mukwo no ura no at daybreak, 

之保非能可多尓 sipopwi no kata ni the call of cranes came from 

多豆我許恵須毛 tadu ga kowe su mo the wetlands at low tide. 

Shinsen jikyō (ca. 892) uses both 氐 and 天 to transcribe te: 衒 天良波 
須 “Make a show, terapasu.” The cursive form of the phonogram 天 results in 
hiragana て, while the simplified form results in katakana テ. 

 

帝 


OJ: te OC: *têh 

LH: teh EMC: tieih GO: tai KN: tei 

NOM: đế, đấy, đí SV: đế SK: thyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, appearing a few times in Kojiki: 名布帝 
耳 “(Her) name is Pute MIMI.” 伊多玖佐夜芸帝阿理那理 itaku sayagete 
arinari “(the land) is in a terrible state of boisterous (confusion)” (KG). 

This phonogram appears only once in Nihon shoki’s poetry: 

NSK 66 

佐瑳羅餓多 sasaragata Undo the string with 

迩之枳能臂毛弘 nisiki no pimwo wo the bamboo whisk design— 

等枳舎気帝 tokisakete that brocade string. 

阿麻多絆泥受迩 amata pa nezu ni I cannot spend many nights; 

多儾比等用能未 tada pito ywo nomwi let us spend but one night. 

There is only one clear example of 帝 in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 806 

多都能馬母 tatu no MA mo How I want to obtain 

伊麻勿愛弖之可 ima mo ete sika even a dragon steed right now, 

阿遠尓与志 awo ni yosi in order to return 

奈良乃美夜古尓 nara no miyakwo ni to the Nara capital, 

由吉帝己牟丹米. yukite komu tame which is good in its greenery. 

As Ōno (1977:510) points out, this single example in Man’yōshū is likely an 
artistic usage, being a play on the previous stanza of Nara capital (even written 
奈良, where the ruler 帝 ‘ruler’ lives). 

 

提 


OJ: te OC: *têʔ or dê 

LH: teh, de EMC: tieih, diei LMC: tiaj GO: dai KN: tei 

NOM: đề, đè, dề, chề SV: đề, thì SK: tyey 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This graph appears in various records 
from the Taihō Census (702): 宇提 Ute, 牟久提賣 Mukutemye, 由彌提 
Yumite, 彌多提賣 Mitatemye, 伊提 Ite, and 等能提 Tonote. It also appears 
on various mokkan, usually in Buddhist transcriptions: 迦葉那提迦葉舎利□ 
kapa nate kapa siari X ‘Kāsyapa, Nadī, sacred bone of Kāsyapa’ (MKK 16:135). 

This phonogram also appears twice in the poetry in Nihon shoki. 

NSK 104 

斯那提流 sinateru Starving for want of food 

箇多烏箇夜摩爾 katawokayama ni on Mount Kataoka, 

伊比爾惠弖 ipi ni wete the shining hill, 

許夜勢屢 koyaseru how pitiful is that farmer 

諸能多比等阿波禮 sono tapito apare who has fallen. 

於夜那斯爾 oya nasi ni Surely you were not 

那禮奈理雞迷夜 narenarikyeme ya raised without parents. 

佐須陀氣能 sasu take no Do you have no lord, 

枳彌波夜那祇 kimi paya naki strong like bamboo? 

伊比爾惠弖 ipi ni wete Starving for want of food 

許夜勢留 koyaseru how pitiful is that farmer 

諸能多比等阿波禮 sono tapito apare who has fallen. 

As the reconstruction makes clear, this phonogram could be used for both te 
and de, and this is what we find in Nihon shoki, de appears five times in the 
poetry, and twice in the annotated notes.Consider the following song in Nihon 
shoki where 提 appears five times, all transcribing de: 

NSK 124 

于知波志能 utipasi no Come out, child 

都梅能阿素弭爾 tume no aswobi ni to play at the edge of 

伊提麻栖古 idemase kwo the plank bridge. 

多麻提能伊鞞能 tamade no ipye no Mistress Yaheko of 

野鞞古能度珥 yapyekwo no twozi the Tamade House. 

伊提麻志能 idemasi no There will be no regrets 

倶伊播阿羅珥茹 kui pa arazi zo if you come out. 

伊提麻西古 idemase kwo Come out, child— 

多麻提能鞞能 tamade no ipye no Mistress Yaheko of 

野鞞古能度珥 yapyekwo no twozi the Tamade House. 

This phonogram also appears quite frequently in Book 5 of Man’yōshū, and 
less frequently in Book 14. 

MYS 800 

宇既具都遠 ukegutu wo And like one to takes off 

奴伎都流其等久 nukituru gotoku shoes with holes in them 

布美奴伎提 puminukite people who step on 

由久智布比等波 yuku tipu pito pa and walk away from family 

伊波紀欲利 ipakwi ywori are perhaps ones who 

奈利提志比等迦 nari desi pito ka are born of boulders or trees. 

奈何名能良佐祢 na ga NA norasane Tell me your name! 

阿米弊由迦婆 ame pye yukaba If you go toward heaven 

奈何麻尓麻尓 na ga mani mani you can do as you please. 


都智奈良婆 tuti naraba If you are on the earth 

大王伊摩周 OPOKIMI imasu then there is a great ruler. 

許能提羅周 kono terasu Below the sun and moon 

日月能斯多波 PITUKWI no sita pa which sheds light here 

阿麻久毛能 amakumwo no to the ends of where 

牟迦夫周伎波美 mukabusu kipami the clouds of the sky are, 

多尓具久能 taniguku no to the ends of the place 

佐和多流伎波美 sawataru kipami where the toad dwells, 

企許斯遠周 kikosi wosu this is the superior land 

久尓能麻保良叙 kuni no mapora zo that our sovereign rules over. 

 

低 


OJ: te, de OC: *tî 

LH: tei EMC: tiei GO: tei KN: tei 

NOM: đê, đây SV: đê SK: tye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in only two poems in 
Man’yōshū, twice as te and once as de. 

MYS 3878 

堦楯 PASITATE NO In the bog of Kumaki 

熊來乃夜良爾 KUMAKI no yara ni of the standing ladder— 

新羅斧 SIRAKWI WONO his Silla axe 

堕入和之 OTOSI IRE wasi he has dropped. Yo ho. 

阿毛低阿毛低 aGEte aGEte Lifting! Lifting up your voice 

勿鳴為曽祢 NA NAKASI so ne do not weep so. 

浮出流夜登将見 UKI IDUru ya to Let us watch 

将見和之 MIMU wasi to see if it comes up. Yo ho. 

MYS 3725 

和我世故之 wa ga sekwosi My beloved, perhaps 

氣太之麻可良婆 kyedasi makaraba if you are to go away, 

思漏多倍乃 sirwotape no please wave your sleeve, 

蘇低乎布良左禰 swode wo purasane made of soft white bark. 

見都追志努波牟 MItutu sinwopamu I shall long for you as I watch. 

 

底 


OJ: te OC: *tîʔ 

LH teih MC: tieih LMC: tiaj GO: tai KN: tei 

NOM: để SV: để SK: tye, ci 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This phonogram appears 27 times in 
the poetry of Nihon shoki and twice in the annotational notes: 植此云多底婁 
“ ‘Plant (a seed)’ this is read tateru” (NSG). 

NSK 123 

枳瀰我梅能 kimi ga me no I dock and stand here 

姑裒之枳舸羅儞 kwoposiki kara ni because I long for a glance 

婆底々威底 patete wite of my highness’ eyes. 

舸矩野姑悲武謀 kaku ya kwopwimu mo How I long for a look— 

枳瀰我梅弘報梨 kimi ga me wo pori a look into my highness’ eyes. 


This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū. As Ōno points out (1977:507), 
the phonogram 底 only appears in books 17 through 20, which perhaps shows a 
shift in the orthographical tastes of the later compiler. The following examples 
are representative: 見底 MIte “looking, and…” (MYS 4032), 奈美多底波 
nami tateba “When the waves get rough…” (MYS 4033), and 由吉底之見弖婆 
yukite si MIteba “If you go and look…” (MYS 4040). 

 

堤 


OJ: te OC: *dê 

LH: de EMC: diei LMC: tiaj GO: tai KN: tei 

NOM: đê SV: đê, đề SK: tyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears once in the poetry of Nihon 
shoki: 

NSK 97 

倭我彌細麼 wa ga miseba When I gaze down 

都奴娑播符 tunwo sapapu on Iware Pond 

以簸例能伊開能 ipare no ike no with rocks covered in vines 

美那矢駄府 minasitapu even the fish 

紆鳴謨 uwo mo come to the surface 

紆陪儞堤堤那皚矩 upe ni dete nageku and lament your parting. 

This poem provides an interesting example, because the phonogram 堤 
transcribes both te and de here. It should be noted that this is the only example of 
堤 transcribing a voiced de in Shoki. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, but all examples I have been 
able to find represent de, with one example a toponym: 佐堤乃埼 Sade no SAKI 
‘Sade Cape’(MYS 662). The other is 井堤超浪 WIde KWOSU NAMI ‘the waves 
that break over the dam’ (MYS 2717). 

 

諦 


OJ: te OC: *têh 

LH: teh EMC: tieih LMC: tiaj GO: tai KN: tei 

NOM: NA SV: đế SK: thyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears in Nihon shoki once: 

NSK 74 

飫瀰能古簸 omi no kwo pa The servant of the crown, 

多倍能波伽摩嗚 tape no pakama wo arranging his hemp trousers 

那々陛嗚絁 nanapye wo si and his seven-fold armor, 

儞播儞陀々始諦 nipa ni tatasite is standing out in the garden. 

阿遥比那陀須暮 ayepi nadasu mo He straightens his leg straps. 

 

題 


OJ: te OC: *dê 

LH: de EMC: diei LMC: tɦiaj GO: dai KN: tei 

NOM: đề SV: đệ, đề SK: tyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears once in the poetry in Nihon 
shoki: 


NSK 75 

野麼等能 yamato no On the peaks 

嗚武羅能陀該儞 womura no take ni of the mountains of Yamato, 

之々符須登 sisi pusu to who shall venture forth 

拕例柯 tare ka to stand before 

擧能居登 kono koto the great one and tell him 

飫裒磨陛儞麻嗚須 opomapye ni mawosu where the beast lays waiting? 

飫裒枳瀰簸 opokimi pa The great lord 

賊據嗚枳舸斯題 soko wo kikasite overhears these words, 

柁磨々枳能 tamamaki no takes his jeweled 

阿娯羅儞陀々伺 agura ni tatasi dais and sits upon it. 

 

代 


OJ: te OC: *lə̂ kh 

LH: dəh EMC: dậih GO: dai KN: tai 

NOM: đại, đời SV: đại SK: toy 

Usage / History: 

Most scholars treat the kanji 代 as a kungana, but looking at the phonology, 
I think this should be reexamined. Knowing that te is often a secondary form, 
from a coalescence of ta-i, the possibility that this is actually a phonogram is too 
great to ignore. I have thus placed this character here. A name appears in a 
Suiko-era record, 錦代王 Prince NISIKIte. Also consider the following from 
Kojiki: 糠代比賣 NUKAte Pimye (KG). It also appears twice in Nihon shoki. In 
one example, the text explains why this character was selected: 故納其地赦死 
罪。是以、號其地曰玉代 ‘His land was accepted as payment for granting his 
life. This land was renamed TAMAte’ (NSG). This example seems to be treating 
the graph as a kungana, but it is more likely that the semantics of the character 
and the phonology match. Thus, the character is being used as a both a 
phonogram and a kungana. The other example is a name: 錦代皇女 Princess 
NISIKIte (NSG). 

I have only found two examples of this in Man’yōshū, MYS 1212 and 1718. 

MYS 1212 

足代過而 Ate SUGWITE Cherry blossoms 

絲鹿乃山之 ITWOGA no YAMA NO on Mount Itoga 

櫻花 SAKURABANA that are beyond Ate— 

不散在南 TIRAZU MO ARAnamu please stay without scattering, 

還来万代 KAPYERIKURU made at least until I come back. 

It is interesting that this poem has 代 once as te, and then at the end as a 
phonogram, de. 

 

手 


OJ: te OC: *hjuʔ or nhuʔ 

LH: śuʔ EMC: śjəuʔ GO: su KN: siu 

NOM: thủ SV: thủ SK: sywu 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, suggesting to the mind OJ te ‘hand.’ This usage in Japan 
appears to be quite old. The earliest known example is from the Suiko era corpus: 
手嶋女王 Princess TESIMA. This same name appears to have been recorded in 
Jōgū shōtoku hōō teisetsu, but all the manuscript has is 手□□□□ and 


someone placed a piece of paper over this spot with the characters 嶋女王. If 
this last example can be trusted, then the name of this princess is preserved in 
two different Suiko era records. This name does not appear in Kojiki or Nihon 
shoki. It should be said, however, that Kojiki records a 手嶋連 TESIMA 
MURAZI (KG). 

The phonogram 手 is also used quite extensively in the Taihō Census (702): 
継手 TUGITE, 宗手 SwoTE (SwoDE?), 小手子賣 WOTEKWOmye, 馬手 
UMATE, 稲手 INATE, 犬手賣 INUTEmye, and 牛手賣 USITEmye. On 
several mokkan excavated from the Fujiwara Palace ruins (fl. 694–710) we find: 
手嶋連 TESIMA MURAZI (unnumbered tablet), 玉手臣 TAMATE OMI (MK 
1888), 阿手良 ATEra (MK 325), and 犬甘咋手 INUKAPI KUPITE (MK 1209). 

This phonogram is also used in various names in Kojiki, showing that the 
documents Kojiki relied on already had preserved these names written with 手: 
日子穂穂手見命 PIKWO POPO TEMI (KG), 大野手比賣 OPONWOTE Pimye 
(KG), 手名椎神 TENADUTI [NO] KAMWI the deity Tenazuchi (KG). 

Naturally, this kungana is also used in names recorded in Nihon shoki. 
According to Ōno (1977:803), there are 78 examples of names with this graph, 
but he does not list a single example. I give the following as a small sampling: 
糠手 NUKATE (NSG), 小手子 WOTEKWO (NSG), 紗手媛 SaTE PIMYE 
(NSG), 猪手 WITE (NSG). 

There are also numerous examples of this usage in Man’yōshū, the following 
is representative. 

MYS 1 

師吉名倍手 sikiNAbeTE The entire realm 

吾己曾座 WARE koso IMASE I alone govern! 

我許背齒 WA koSO BA Then it shall be I 

告目 NORAME who will tell you 

家呼毛名雄母 IPYE wo mo NA WO mo of my home and of my name. 

 

價 


OJ: te OC: *krâh 

LH: kah EMC: kah GO: ke KN: ka 

NOM: giá SV: giá SK: ka 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, suggesting to the reader OJ te ‘price, compensation.’ This 
usage appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2949 

得田價異 UTATE KYE NI With this unusual situation 

心欝悒 KOKORO IBUSESI my heart is feeling gloomy. 

事計 KOTO PAKARI Would you do something different 

吉為吾兄子 YOKU SE WA GA SEKWO my beloved, even if 

相有時谷 APERU TOKI DANI it is only when we meet each other? 

 

直 


OJ: te OC: *drəkh or *drək 

LH: ḍiə or ḍɨk EMC: ḍɨh or ḍjək GO: diki KN: tioku 

NOM: trực, chực, sực SV: trực, chực SK: chi, cik 


Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, suggesting to the reader OJ te ‘substitute, compensation.’ 
The original Chinese meaning is direct or straight, but it could also be used as a 
loan for 値 ‘price.’ This kungana is only found once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2877 

何時志毛 ITU PA simo It is not as if 

不戀有登者 KWOPWIZU ARI to PA there will come a time when 

雖不有 ARANEDOMO my longing will cease, 

得田直比来 UTATE KONOKORO but the unusual situation lately 

戀之繁母 KWOPWIsi SIGESI mo leaves my longing even stronger. 

 

點 


OJ: temu OC: *têmʔ 

LH: temʔ EMC: tiem GO: temu KN: temu 

NOM: chấm, điểm, đếm SV: điểm SK: tyem 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage appears twice in Man’yōshū 
(MYS 1272 and 2353). 

MYS 1272 

劔後 TATI NO SIRI In Irino deep in the mountains, 

鞘納野迩 SAYA NI IRINWO ni like the tip of a sword in its sheath, 

葛引吾妹 KUZU PIKU WAGIMWO my beloved pulls arrowroot. 

真袖以 MASWODE MOTI Is she cutting the summer herbs 

著點等鴨 KISEtemu to KAMO (to weave) so she can put 

夏草苅母 NATUKUSA KARU mo the garment on me with both arms? 

 

智 


OJ: ti < te OC: *treh 

LH: ṭieh EMC: ṭjeh GO: ti KN: ti 

NOM: trí, tré SV: trí SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, as found in the Wa chieftain title 狗古 
智卑狗 *kɔ-kɔ-te-pe-kɔ. The Han section of Wei zhi also notes: 各有長帥、大 
者自名爲臣智 ‘Each land has a leader, and the powerful ones call themselves 
*ɡin-te.’ 

This phonogram also appears on the Paekche Sathaykcicek stele: 砂宅智積 
*sa-tak-te-sek．The graph 智 appears in many names in Silla inscriptions, the 
most frequent being to transcribe 夫智 *pute, part of a name. 

This phonogram appears in several names of people who originated from the 
Korean peninsula, which data are preserved in Nihon shoki: 于斯岐阿利叱智干 
岐 (King of Mimana) Usiki Arisiti Kanki, 伊叱夫礼智干岐 Isipureti Kanki. 

This phonogram also appears in the Suiko era corpus: 伊波智和希 Ipati 
Wakwi, 阿加波智君 Akapati KIMI, 乎波智 Wopati, 多智奴女王 Princess 
Tatinu. This phonogram appears once in the liturgies, in the name of the deity 御 
賀豆智命 MIkaduti [NO] MIKOTO (NT 2). 

This phonogram also appears on a variety of mokkan: 名己智牛養 ‘named 
Koti USIKAPI (MK 3290) and 智万呂 Timaro (MK 807). 

This phonogram is also used in Kojiki, but not as often as 知: 国之久比奢 
母智神 the deity KUNI NO Kupizamoti (KG), 久久能智神 The deity (of the 


trees) Kukunoti (KG), 八俣遠呂智 The eight-headed serpent Woroti (KG). It is 
never used in the poetry in Kojiki. 

The phonogram 智 is used 36 times in Nihon shoki (compared to 34 times 
for 知), appearing five times in annotational notes, and 31 times in poetry: 茅渟 
此云智怒 “ ‘(The place name) Chinu’ is read tinu” (NSG). 

NSK 3 

阿磨佐箇屢 amasakaru Having crossed over 

避奈菟謎廼 pinatu mye no the narrow, earthly straits, 

以和多邏素西渡 iwatarasu setwo the provincial maidens 

以嗣箇播箇柁輔智 isikapa kataputi stand on the banks of the river 

箇多輔智爾 kataputi ni on the banks of the Ishikawa, 

阿彌播利和柁嗣 ami pariwatasi spreading out their nets. 

妹慮豫嗣爾 mero yosi ni Pull in those nets 

豫嗣豫利據禰 yosi yorikone by pulling on the meshes! 

以嗣箇播箇柁輔智 isikapa kataputi On the banks of the Ishikawa. 

This is the second most commonly used phonogram in Man’yōshū to 
represent ti (知 appears 406 times, but 智 only 18 times). 

MYS 4164 

知智乃實乃 titi no MWI no My royal fathers, like the ti 

父能美許等 TITI no mikoto of the seed of the titi plant, 

波播蘇葉乃 papa swoBA no and my royal mothers, 

母能美己等 PAPA no mikoto like the pa of the Japanese oak, 

於保呂可尓 oporoka ni I think they 

情盡而 KOKORO TUKUSITE generally tried 

念良牟 OMOPUramu to do all in their power. 

 

知 


OJ: ti OC: *tre 

LH: ṭie EMC: ṭje GO: ti KN: ti 

NOM: trí, tri SV: tri, trí SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS, and it appears on various inscriptions 
preserved on the Korean peninsula. On various stelae from Silla this phonogram 
is used to transcribe: 夫知王 Prince Puti, 知居伐干支 Tikopat Kanki, 夫阿干 
比知夫知 Pua Kanpiti Puti. 

This phonogram also appears in various Paekche quotes preserved in Nihon 
shoki: 沙知比跪 Sati Pikwo, an apparent Paekche rendition of the Japanese 
legendary figure 襲津彦 SOTU PIKWO. 伊叱夫礼知奈未 Isipure Tinam, 久 
知波多枳 (fortress of) Kutipataki. 

This phonogram also appears in the Suiko era corpus and on, where 知 
becomes the standard graph for ti: 多知波奈止与比天皇 Great King Tatipana 
Toyopi (halo inscription recorded in the origin record of Gangōji), 波知乃古王 
Prince Patinokwo (genealogy of Prince Shōtoku). This phonogram appears 
frequently in the liturgies: 北方佐渡与里乎知能所乎奈牟多知疫鬼之住加登 
定賜比 KITA [NO] MO [PA] sadwo yori woti no TOKORO wo namutati EKI [NO] 
ONI NO SUMIka to SADAMETAMApi “From the direction of the north, (the deities) 
have determined that the dwellings of you, the demons of pestilence, will be the 
distant places from Sado Island northward…” (NT 16). This phonogram is 


popular on mokkan: 尾治国知多郡 WOPARI Province Tita District (MK 151), 
知夫利郡由良里 Tiburi District Yura Village (unnumbered tablet), and 夫由己 
母利伊・己知知知屋 puyugomori i…koti titiYA ‘hiding in the winter…this 
house of Titi…’ (MKK 28:207). 

In Kojiki 知 is the standard graph for ti: 啼伊佐知伎 NAKI isatiki ‘weep 
violently’ (KG), 赤加賀知 AKA kagati ‘red cherry’ (KG), 木花知流比賣 
KONO PANA tiru pimye ‘Princess Kono Hana Chiru’ (KG), 天之都度閇知泥神 
‘the deity AMA NO Tudwopetine’ (KG). According to Ōno (1977:175) 知 is 
used 77 times in the poetry of Kojiki. 

KK 80 

意富麻幣 opomapye In the shade of 

袁麻幣須久泥賀 womapye sukune ga the metal gate of Ōmae 

加那斗加宜 kanatwo kage and Womae Sukune, 

加久余理許泥 kaku yorikone come gather together! 

阿米多知夜米牟 ame tatiyamemu Let us wait for the rain to end. 

The phonogram 知 appears ten times in annotational notes, and 24 times in 
poetry in Nihon shoki: 灼然、此云以椰知擧 “ ‘Brilliant’ is read iyatiko” 
(NSG), and 百濟俗號此鳥曰倶知 “People in Paekche call these birds kuti” 
(NSG). 

NSK 21 

波辭枳豫辭 pasikiyosi Ah, how wonderful! 

和藝幣能伽多由 wagipe no katayu Clouds are climbing upward 

區毛位多知區暮 kumwowi tatiku mo from the direction of home. 

This phonogram is very prominent in Man’yōshū, appearing 406 times, 
dwarfing in number all other phonograms used to represent ti. 

MYS 3583 

真幸而 MASAKIKUTE If my beloved performs 

伊毛我伊波伴伐 imwo ga ipapaba purification rituals for my safety, 

於伎都奈美 okitu nami even if the waves in the offing 

知敝尓多都等母 tipye ni tatu tomo pile up a thousand times, 

佐波里安良米也母 sapari arame yamo would there be any obstacles? 

 

至 


OJ: ti OC: *tits 

LH: tśis EMC: tśih GO: si KN: si 

NOM: chí SV: chí, trí SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. While there are no examples on the 
extant stele in Paekche, there is an example of this phonogram on the 
Kwangkaytho stele: 巖門至城 *ɡɨɑm-mən-ti fortress. 

Various names with this graph also appear in Paekche quotations preserved 
in Nihon shoki: 百久至 Pak Kuti, 阿首至 Asuti, 爾汶至 Nimonti, 既殿至 
Ketenti (all from a Paekche quote found in the record of Jingū). In one record, 
the Nihon shoki compilers only had a surname, Mononobe Muraji, and did not 
know the first name of the person, so they relied on a Paekche record, which 
records that the person was named 物部至至連 MONONOBYE Titi MURAZI. It is 
also interesting that Paekche records represent the Japanese surname Kaputi 
(traditionally written 河内 Kawachi) as 加不至 kaputi. 


This graph is last seen used in the Suiko era corpus: 多至波奈等已比乃彌 
己 等 Tatipana Toyopi no Mikoto, and 多 至 波 奈 大 女 郎 Tatipana 
OPOIRATUMYE. Perhaps because of the semantics (至 means ‘arrive, most’) this 
graph was generally avoided in the Asuka and Nara eras. The only example I can 
find on wooden documents (mokkan) is within part of a name, 至古志 Tikwosi 
(unnumbered tablet). 

 

致 


OJ: ti OC: *trits 

LH: ṭis EMC: ṭih GO: ti KN: ti 

NOM: trí SV: trí SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in a few Paekche names 
preserved in Nihon shoki: 久羅麻致支彌 Kura Mati Kimi, and 怒唎斯致契 
Nworisitike. This phonogram also appears in a fossilized relic in Nihon shoki: 安 
致臣 Ati OMI, a man from Tukusi and perhaps originally of peninsular lineage. 

This phonogram is also used by the Nihon shoki editors in one annotational 
note, and nine times in poetry: 蓬蔂、此云伊致寐姑 “ ‘Ichibiko Hill’ is read 
itibikwo” (NSG). 

NSK 125 

多致播那播 tatibana pa The fruit of the orange tree 

於能我曳多々々 ono ga yeda yeda grows each on its own branch, 

那例々騰母 nareredomo but when these are strung 

陀麻爾農矩騰岐 tama ni nuku toki together as jewels they are 

於野兒弘儞農倶 oyazi wo ni nuku strung on the same cord. 

 

直 


OJ: ti, tiki OC: *drəkh or *drək 

LH: ḍiə or ḍɨk EMC: ḍɨh or ḍjək GO: diki KN: tioku 

NOM: trực, chực, sực SV: trực, chực SK: chi, cik 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This is based on the fact that the name 
of the person sent by the kingdom of Paekche to educate the Japanese court in 
Chinese is known as 阿直岐 Atiki. It should be remembered that Kojiki records 
this same name as 阿知吉師 Ati Kisi. Another person from Paekche is called 
直支 that may be Toki as the interlinear reading has, or it may be Tiki. 
Considering the Sino-Vietnamese data, it is possible this graph entered the 
peninsula as *trək. This is further supported by the interlinear reading in Nihon 
shoki of 直支 as toki (< *tək-ki). 

Perhaps the names preserved in documents in Shōsōin from the Nara era are 
people related to these Paekche immigrants: 阿直史 姪 賣 Atiki PUBITO 
MEPImye, 阿直立萬呂 Atiki TATUmaro, 安直刀足 Atiki Twosuku (?). This 
phonogram appears on many mokkan, but the majority represent the title atapi. 

 

恥 


OJ: ti OC: *rhəʔ 

LH: ṭhiəʔ EMC: ṭhɨʔ GO: ti KN: ti 

NOM: sỉ, xỉ SV: sỉ SK: chi 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears once in Man’yōshū, in a 
somewhat cryptic poem: 

MYS 3458 

奈勢能古夜 nase no kwo ya My beloved husband! 

等里乃乎加恥志 torino wo katisi The middle field that 

奈可太乎礼 nakada wore he conquered of Tori Moor bends, 

安乎祢思奈久与 a wo ne si naku yo and causes me to cry. 

伊久豆君麻弖尓 ikuduku made ni Even so that I heave a sigh. 

The problem with previous attempts to decipher this poem is that they 
consistently read 恥 as di ‘road,’ but it is evident that the graph is ti, and should 
be interpreted as such. As the eastern songs do not distinguish between no and 
nwo, I interpret torino as torinwo ‘Tori Moor.’ 

 

陳 


OJ: ti OC: *drin 

LH: ḍin EMC: ḍjen GO: dimu KN: tin 

NOM: chặn,trằn, trườn SV: trận, trần SK: cin 

Usage / History: 

This is phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only twice in Man’yōshū, 
both times to represent the toponym Chinu: tinu 陳奴 (MYS 1145) and 陳努 
(MYS 1811). This phonogram may have been selected for the nasal final to show 
a short vowel in the following syllable: tin-nu. 

 

笞 


OJ: ti OC: *rhə 

LH: ṭhiə EMC: ṭhɨ LMC: trhi GO: ti KN: ti 

NOM: xuy SV: xuy SK: chi 

Usage / History: 

This is a rare phonogram that belongs to the LJS. It appears once in a poem 
in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 13 

瀰都瀰都志 mitumitusi You, the intrepid 

倶梅能故邏餓 kume no kwora ga sons of the Kume— 

介耆茂等珥 kakimoto ni at the base of the fence 

阿波赴珥破 apa pu nipa in the millet field 

介瀰羅毘苔茂苔 kamira pitomoto there is one fetid leek. 

曾廼餓毛苔 sono ga moto As one would pull it 

曾禰梅屠那藝弖 so ne me tunagite by root and by stem, 

于笞弖之夜莽務 utitesi yamamu we will utterly smite them. 

 

池 


OJ: ti OC: *drai 

LH: ḍiai EMC: ḍieLMC: trɦi GO: di KN: ti 

NOM: đìa, trì, trề SV: trì SK: tha, co 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, appearing twice in one poem in Nihon 
shoki: 


NSK 28 

伊徒姑播茂 itwokwo pa mo Men with relatives 

伊徒姑奴池 itwokwo dwoti will fight together. 

伊裝阿波那 iza apana Commence the battle, 

和例波 ware pa shall we? 

多摩岐波屢 tamaki paru Minister Uti, 

于池能阿層餓 uti no aso ga possessing a strong spirit, 

波邏濃知波 paranuti pa does not have a stomach 

異佐誤阿例椰 isagwo are ya made of pebbles. 

伊裝阿波那 iza apana Commence the battle, 

和例波 ware pa shall we? 

 

馳 


OJ: ti OC: *drai 

LH: ḍiai EMC: ḍieLMC: trɦi GO: di KN: ti 

NOM: NA SV: trì, chì SK: chi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears twice in Nihon shoki in the 
name of the deity of trees 句句廼馳 kukunoti. 

 

鎭 


OJ: ti OC: *trin 

LH: ṭin EMC: ṭjen GO: den KN: ten 

NOM: chắn, trấn, trớn SV: trấn SK: cin 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears once in Izumo fudoki in the 
fish name 鎭仁 tini, which is also known as tinu. This phonogram likely was 
selected because of the final -n which is followed by a nasal initial ni. 

 

㨖 


OJ: ti OC: *trit 

LH: ṭis EMC: ṭih LMC: tri GO: ti KN: ti 

NOM: NA SV: trí SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This is a rare phonogram that I tentatively group in the CBS. It appears twice 
in one poem in Nihon shoki. 

NSK 89 

飫裒陁㨖嗚 opotati wo Though I stand here 

多黎播枳多㨖氐 tarepakitatite girded with a large sword 

農哿儒登慕 nukazu tomo I intend to fulfill 

須衞娑陀志氐謀 suwe patasite mo my desire and meet her— 

阿波夢登茹於謀賦 apamu tozo omopu without drawing my sword. 

 

千 


OJ: ti OC: *tshîn 

LH: tshen EMC: tshien GO: semu KN: sen 

NOM: thiên SV: thiên SK: chyen 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, with 千 ‘a thousand’ calling to mind OJ ti ‘thousand.’ 
The earliest datable use of this graph appears in the Taihō census (702): 千縄 
TINAPA, 千嶋賣 TISIMAmye, 千麻呂 TImaro. While it is impossible at this 


point to date these, there are several instances of 千 used on mokkan excavated 
from the Fujiwara Palace (fl. 694–710) site: 千麻呂 TImaro (MK 1126) and 阿 
曇千足 ADUMI TIASI (MKK 5:86). 

This kungana also appears in Kojiki: 八千矛神 YATI POKO [NO] KAMWI 
the deity Yachihoko (KG), 高千穂宮 TAKATIPO [NO] MIYA the Takachiho 
Palace (KG), and 千千都久和比賣 TITI tukuwa pimye ‘Princess Chichi 
Tsukuwa’ (KG). 

This kungana is also quite prominent in Nihon shoki, where Ōno (1977:825) 
notes there are 37 examples in the work, but he does not quote any examples. I 
have provide the following three examples, all from names: 千千衝倭姫 TITI 
TUKU YAMATO PIMYE Princess Chichi Tsuku Yamato (NSG), 千熊 長 彦 
TIKUMA NAGA PIKWO (NSG), 高千穗 TAKATIPO (NSG). 

I have counted roughly 34 examples of 千 in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 266 

淡海乃海 APUMI no UMI You plovers of the evening waves 

夕浪千鳥 YUPU NAMI TIDORI on the sea of Afumi— 

汝鳴者 NA GA NAKEBA when you call out 

情毛思努尓 KOKORO mo sinwo ni my thoughts wither 

古所念 INISIPE OMOPOYU thinking of days long ago. 

 

茅 


OJ: ti OC: *mrû 

LH: mɔu EMC: mau GO: meu, mau KN: bau 

NOM: NA SV: mao SK: mwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram is used as a kungana, with 茅 ‘thatch’ suggesting to the 
reader OJ ti ‘cogon grass.’ The earliest known example of this appears in Nihon 
shoki where there are many examples, but these all transcribe the place name 
Chinu: 茅渟 TINU. 

This phonogram also appears once in Shoku Nihongi in the name 茅野王 
Prince TInu (739.3.21). This kungana also appears once in Man’yōshū, but only 
in the toponym Chinu: TINU 茅渟 (MYS 999). 

 

道 


OJ: ti OC: *lûʔ 

LH: douʔ EMC: dâuʔ GO: dau KN: tau 

NOM: đạo, dạo SV: đáo,đạo SK: two 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ ti ‘path.’ This kungana appears in 
Kojiki: 道敷大神 TISIKI OPOKAMWI ‘the great deity Chishiki’ (KG), 日名照 
額田毘道男伊許知邇神 PINA TERU NUKATAbiTI WOikotini KAMWI ‘the 
deity Hina Teru Nuka Tabichi Oikotini’ (KG). 

According to Ōno (1977:803) Nihon shoki contains 59 examples of 道 used 
to transcribe ti, but most examples are actually of the voiced counterpart di; he 
does not quote any examples of ti, however. I provide the following: 長道磐神 
the deity NAGATIPA (NSG), 道守臣 TIMORI OMI (NSG), and 道守朝臣 
TIMORI ASOMI (NSG). This same usage appears but once in Man’yōshū, 年魚 
道 AYUTI, a toponym, Ayuchi (MYS 3260). 

Often when ti occurs medially it undergoes progressive prenasalization to di. 


This usage appears in Kojiki: 淡道 (Island of) APADI. An example from Nihon 
shoki is 大戸之道尊 the deity OPOTWO NO DI. This graph also appears in a 
few place names in Man’yōshū: 莵道 UDI (MYS 7), 活道山 IKUDI YAMA 
‘Mount Ikuji’ (MYS 478). 

 

血 


OJ: ti OC: *hwît 

LH: huet EMC: xiwet GO: kuweti KN: kuwetu 

NOM: huyết, hoét SV: huyết SK: hyel 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, where the graph for blood calls to mind OJ ti ‘blood.’ This 
usage appears in Kojiki, mainly in toponyms, where the underlying meaning of 
‘blood’ appears to have been stressed, though the original etymology is unclear: 
血沼海 TINU [NO] UMI ‘Sea of TINU,’ 宇陁之血原 uda NO TIPARA, 血浦 
TIURA ‘Bay of Ti.’ Kojiki uses a folk etymology to say that these places were 
scenes of bloody events, and were named thus. This is likely nothing more than 
folk etymology, and an original phonetic rendition was changed to kungana. 

This theory is strengthened by the way 血 is used in Nihon shoki: 血原 
TIPARA ‘field of blood,’ 血田 TIDA (cultivated field of blood?). Regarding the 
first example, the Shoki compiler claims that the blood was so deep that the field 
was labeled the field of blood, while the second contains the explanatory line, 
“The place where the blood flowed was called tida.” 

There are three examples of this kungana in Man’yōshū: 血沼壮士 TINU 
WOTOKWO ‘the valiant man of Chinu’ (MYS 1809), 血沼之海 TINU NO UMI 
‘sea of Chinu’(MYS 2486), and 血速舊 / 于遅乃渡 TIPAYABURU / udi no 
WATARI ‘the ferry of Uji that is endowed with power’ (MYS 3236). 

 

乳 


OJ: ti OC: *noʔ 

LH: ńoʔ EMC: ńźjuʔ GO: niu KN: ziu 

NOM: nhũ, vú SV: nhũ SK: ywu 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, suggesting to the reader OJ ti ‘breast, breast milk.’ This 
graph appears once in Kojiki, likely used to infer the meaning ‘breasts’: 道之長 
乳齒神 MITI NO NAGATIPA [NO] KAMWI ‘the deity of the road of long breasts 
and teeth.’ Philippi (1968:521) wonders if nagati does mean ‘long-road,’ but this 
seems redundant, since miti already means ‘road, path.’ 

Nihon shoki records two names words written with 乳: 乳近稲置 TIDIKA 
INAKWI, likely a place name. Another is 乳娘 TI IRATUMYE, the daughter of 
Swoga Yamada Isikapa Maro. This usage also appears on a mokkan excavated 
from the Heijō Palace ruins: 大宅乳母 OPOYAKE TIOMO (unnumbered tablet). 

 

敕 


OJ: tiki OC: *rhək 

LH: ṭhɨk EMC: ṭhjək GO: tiki KN: tiyoku 

NOM: sắc SV: sắc SK: chiku 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram appears in the Paekchebased 
name 安勅連 Atiki MURAZI, which appears in a Nara era document, as 
well as in Shinsen shōjiroku. It is Shōjiroku that labels this a family from 


Paekche. It is thus tempting to label this usage from the PBS, but without any 
other information, I have erred on the side of caution. 

 

珍 


OJ: tinu, ti OC: *trən *trə[n]§ 

LH: ṭɨn EMC: ṭjen GO: timu KN: tin 

NOM: trân SV: chân, trân SK: cin 

Usage / History: 

I place this phonogram in the PBS. This phonogram is found in a title 
recorded in the beginning of the record of Jingū: 微叱己知波珍干岐 Mwisikoti 
Patori Kanki. Shiki glosses the digraph 波珍 as 波止利 patori, which is based 
on Old Chinese, as Starostin (2005) reconstructs 珍 as *tər. However, as 
Schuessler’s work is a minimal Old Chinese reconstruction, I have elected to 
ignore this reading for the time being. Baxter and Sagart reconstruct this as OC 
*trə[n], where they claim that [n] could be *-r or *-n (2014:252–255). 

This phonogram appears in documents preserved in Shōsōin in the following 
toponyms: 珍努 Tinu, and 珍縣主 District Chieftain of Tinu. 

This usage as tinu also appears in Man’yōshū once: 

MYS 2486 

珍海 tinu NO UMI Like the small pine tree 

濱邊小松 PAMApye NO KWOMATU near the beach of the sea of Chinu 

根深 NE PUKAMETE with its roots deep, 

吾戀度 ARE KWOPWI WATARU I will continue to yearn 

人子姤 PITO NO KWO YUWE NI because of that man. 

We are assured that the intended reading of 珍海 is tinu [NO] UMI, because 
after this poem is a note which says that a different poem has: 血沼之海之 
TINU NO UMI NO. 

 

秩 


OJ: titi OC: *drit 

LH: ḍit EMC: ḍjet GO: diti KN: titu 

NOM: chặt, chật,giựt SV: trật SK: cil 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears most commonly in the 
toponym 秩父 Titibu, as found on a wooden document excavated from the Nara 
capital: 武蔵国秩父郡 Muzasi Province, Titibu District. The ‘Kukozō Hongi’ 
section of Kujiki preserves the name as 知々夫 titibu, thus underscoring that 秩 
represents titi. This phonogram also appears in a tax register of Izumo from 730 
in the toponym: 伊秩郷 Ititi Village, though the exact reading is unclear. No 
such toponym is found in Izumo fudoki. 

 

臺 


OJ: to OC: *də̂ 

LH: də EMC: dậi GO: dai KN: tai 

NOM: đài SV: đài SK: toy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, appearing in the well known place name 
邪馬臺 *yamadə ‘Yamato.’ It also appears in the name 臺与 *təyɑ ‘Toyo.’ 
Later the graph 台 comes to represent 臺 (see below). 

 


登 


OJ: to OC: *tə̂ ŋ 

LH: təŋ EMC: təŋ GO: tou KN: tou 

NOM: đăng, đáng SV: đăng SK: tung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. While I have not found any examples in 
the Paekche corpus, the following example appears in the following name from 
the record of Kinmei: 薦集部首登弭 KOMOTUBYE OBITO Tomi. The record in 
Shoki gives the impression this is a Japanese person, but his wife’s house, where 
he stops on his way from Mimana to Paekche, is located on the peninsula. This 
suggests that he was likely a soldier already on the peninsula, and the story was 
preserved in a Paekche account, suggesting a Paekche tradition. 

This phonogram is popular in the Asuka era corpus. It appears frequently in 
the liturgies: 今年二月爾御年初将賜登為而、皇御孫命宇豆能幣帛乎、朝日 
能 豊 逆 登 爾 称 辞 竟 奉 久 登 宣 KOTOSI [NO] KISARAGI ni MITOSI 
PAZIMETAMAPAMU to SITE SUME MIMA [NO] MIKOTO [NO] udu no MITEGURA wo 
ASAPI no TOYO SAKANOBORI ni TATAPEGOTO WOPEMATURAku to NORITAMAPU “In 
the second month of this year, as (the Divine Ruler) is about to begin planting, I 
finish presenting these words as the morning sun richly rises into the sky, and the 
Imperial Grandson presents the exalted offerings” (NT 1). This phonogram 
appears a number of times on mokkan: 能登郡 Noto District (MK 2280), 登宇 
波伊伊伊 to upa iii: no meaning, simply practicing writing (MK 1976), and 毘 
登 pito (bito?) ‘person’ (MK 7553). 

Representative examples appear in Kojiki: 訓常云登許 “The reading for the 
graph 常 is toko” (KG), 袁登古 wotokwo ‘adult male’ (KG), 袁登賣 
wotomye ‘adult female’ (KG), 美蕃登 mipoto ‘august vulva’ (KG), and 登賀米 
受 togamezu “(The Sun Goddess) did not criticize him” (KG). In the following 
poem it appears six times. 

KK 96 

美延斯怒能 miyesinwo no Did someone announce 

袁牟漏賀多氣爾 womurwo ga take ni before the great ruler that 

志斯布須登 sisi pusu to game lies in waiting 

多禮曾 tare so on the peak of Omuro 

意富麻幣爾麻袁須 opomapye ni mawosu in Miyoshino? 

夜須美斯志 yasumisisi In the heavenly eighty rays 

和賀淤富岐美能 wa ga opokimi no of sunshine, my great lord 

斯志麻都登 sisi matu to sat upon his high seat 

阿具良爾伊麻志 agura ni imasi waiting for game when 

斯漏多閇能 sirwotape no a horsefuly bit him 

蘇弖岐蘇那布 swode kiswonapu on the flesh of his arm 

多古牟良爾 takwomura ni where he wore his sleeve, 

阿牟加岐都岐 amu kakituki like white hemp offerings. 

曾能阿牟袁 sono amu wo Then a dragonfly quickly 

阿岐豆波夜具比 akidu payagupi scooped up the horsefly, 

加久能碁登 kaku no goto so thus it must have been, 

那爾於波牟登 na ni opamu to that people named 

蘇良美都 sworamitu the land of Yamato 


夜麻登能久爾袁 yamato no kuni wo which fills the firmament 

阿岐豆志麻登布 akidu sima topu Akizushima. 

This phonogram appears quite frequently in Nihon shoki, appearing three 
times in annotational notes and 15 times in poetry: 荷持、此云能登利 “ ‘The 
(village) 荷持,’ this is read notori” (NSG), 伐本截末、此云謨登岐利須衞於 
茲波羅比 “ ‘Cut the base and stripped of its branches,’ this is read moto kiri 
suwe osiparapi” (NSG). 

NSK 75 

野麼等能 yamato no On the peaks 

嗚武羅能陀該儞 womura no take ni of the mountains of Yamato, 

之々符須登 sisi pusu to who shall venture forth 

拕例柯 tare ka to stand before 

擧能居登 kono koto the great one and tell him 

飫裒磨陛儞麻嗚須 opomapye ni mawosu where the beast lays waiting? 

飫裒枳瀰簸 opokimi pa The great lord 

賊據嗚枳舸斯題 soko wo kikasite overhears these words, 

柁磨々枳能 tamamaki no takes his jeweled 

阿娯羅儞陀々伺 agura ni tatatsi dais and sits upon it. 

施都魔枳能 situmaki no He takes the dais 

阿娯羅儞陀々伺 agura ni tatasi of cloth and sits upon it. 

斯々磨都登 sisi matu to Waiting for the beast. 

倭我伊麻西麼 wa ga imaseba As I sit here 

佐謂麻都登 sawi matu to waiting for the boar, 

倭我陀々西麼 wa ga tataseba as I rise to my feet, 

陀倶符羅爾 takubura ni a horsefly lands 

阿武柯枳都枳 amu kakituki on my arm and bites me. 

曾能阿武嗚 sono amu wo a dragonfly appears 

婀枳豆波野倶譬 akidu paya kupi and devours the horsefly. 

波賦武志謀 papu musi mo Even the crawling insects 

飫裒枳瀰儞麼都羅符 opokimi ni maturapu continue to serve their lord. 

儺我柯陀播 na ga kata pa I shall leave a tribute 

於柯武 okamu for you, 

婀岐豆斯麻野麻登 akitusima yamato Akizushima Yamato. 

This phonogram is the second most popular to transcribe to in Man’yōshū, 
appearing 522 times, in every book of the anthology. The first is 等. In the 
following poem 登 appears three times. 

MYS 3625 

由久美都能 yuku midu no I am a person of the world 

可敝良奴其等久 kapyeranu gotoku that leaves not even a trace, 

布久可是能 puku kaze no like the water that flows on 

美延奴我其登久 miyenu ga gotoku and never returns, 

安刀毛奈吉 atwo mo naki or like the wind that blows 

与能比登尓之弖 yo no pito ni site but cannot be seen; 

和可礼尓之 wakarenisi I will sleep alone on the sleeves 

伊毛我伎世弖思 imwo ga kisete si of the well-worn robe 

奈礼其呂母 naregoromo that my beloved put on me 


蘇弖加多思吉弖 swode kata sikite before she departed 

比登里可母祢牟 pitori kamo nemu spread out on the floor. 

 

止 


OJ: to OC: *təʔ *təʔ§ 

LH: tśəʔ EMC: tśɨʔ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: chỉ SV: chỉ SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This is one of the oldest known phonogram used to represent Old Japanese to, 
and I place it in the PBS based on its phonology. Some scholars have argued that 
this is not a phonogram, but a kungana (cf. Ōno 1962:171), based on Old 
Japanese tom- ‘stop’ (止 means ‘stop’). Ōno (ibid.) states, “It is difficult to 
believe that the use of this graph was influenced by the orthography of either 
China or the peninsula.” 

Consider, however, that Starostin (2005) reconstructs this as Old Chinese *təʔ, 
and Coblin (1983:153) reconstructs it in Eastern Han as *tjəh. The newest 
reconstruction by Schuessler (2009:97) reconstructs OC *təʔ and Later Han *tśəʔ. 
Baxter and Sagart reconstruct this exactly as Schuessler. As the *t- of 止 
affricates to tɕɨ fairly early in Chinese phonological history, I conclude that this 
graph is a fossilized remnant of an Old Chinese usage imported into the 
peninsula, and then passed on to the Wa by Paekche (or other) mediaries. 

The earliest examples with 止 are found in Jōgū Teisetsu, where Suiko’s 
name is written 止余美気加志支夜比売 Toyo mike kasikiya pimye. In a 
mokkan excavated from the ruins of the Fujiwara Palace (fl. 694–710), the 
following fragment of a song is found (MK 1613): 

奈尓皮ツ尓 nanipatu ni At the ferry of Naniwa 

佐久矢己乃皮奈 saku YA ko no pana how these blossoms bloom— 

布由己母利 puyugomori awakening from winter 

伊真皮々留部止 iMA pa paruPYE to now they say it is almost spring. 

This phonogram appears in many of the liturgies: 此神止白止負賜支。此 
乎物知人等乃卜事乎以弖卜止母。出留神乃御心母無止白止聞看弖。KONO 
KAMWI to MAWOSE to OPOSETAMAPIki. KO wo MONO SIRI PITODOMO no URAGOTO 
wo MOTIte URAPEdomo, IDUru KAMWI no MIKOKORO mo NASI to MAWOSU to 
KIKOSIMESIte, “(The Divine Ruler) commanded (the diviners) to declare which 
deity it was. The diviners performed divination, but humbly reported that 
nothing appeared from any deity” (NT 4). 

There are no examples of 止 in Kojiki or Nihon shoki. Interestingly there are 
a variety of examples found on wooden fragments that have been excavated. 
From the ruins of the Fujiwara Palace we find examples like: 移部止己麻 
YaBYE Tokoma (personal name, MK 148), 伊止志 Itosi (name, MK 1007), 詔 
大 命 乎 伊 奈止申 者 MIKOTONORI OPOMIKOTO wo ina to MAWOSU PA… 
‘Regarding those who say they do not agree with the command of the great 
one…’ (MK 1063). 

There are six examples in Man’yōshū, but they all appear in Book 18. 

MYS 4074 

櫻花 SAKURABANA People say that 

今曽盛等 IMA so SAKARI to the cherry blossoms 

雖人云 PITO PA IPEDO are now at their best, 


我佐不之毛 WARE PA sabusi mo but I am so lonely— 

支美止之不在者 kimi to si ARANEBA as I am not with you. 

Ōno (1962:171) believes this graph was generally avoided because of its 
overly common semantics, but interestingly its use appears to have become 
common enough, with its simple shape and low stroke count, to be both the basis 
for hiragana と and katanaka ト. 

 

等 


OJ: to OC: *tə̂ ŋʔ 

LH: təŋʔ EMC: təŋʔ GO: tou KN: tou 

NOM: đẳng, đấng SV: đẳng SK: tung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, examples found in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō 
teisetsu: 名阿米久尓意斯波留支比里尓波乃弥己等 “His name is Ame Kuni 
Osiparuki Piro no mikoto.” 生名多至波奈等已比乃弥己等 “She gave birth to 
a son, named Tatibana Toyopi no mikoto.” This phonogram also appears on a 
number of mokkan: 袁等売 wotomye ‘maiden’ (MK 2243), 之比等等々流刀毛 
意夜志己々呂曽 sipito to toru twomo iyasi kokoro so ‘Even if I take my 
father-in-law, such base feelings…’ (MK 174). 

This phonogram also appears in Kojiki: 伊毛能美許等 imwo no mikoto 
“my honorific beloved” (KG). 

KK 54 

夜麻賀多迩 yamagata ni How delightful it is 

麻祁流阿袁那母 makyeru awona mo to pick together even 

岐備比登登 kibwi pito to the greens that were planted 

等母迩斯都米婆 tomo ni si tumeba in the mountain fields, 

多怒斯久母阿流迦 tanwosiku mo aru ka with that person from Kibi. 

This graph is the most dominant for to in Shoki, appearing nine times in 
annotational notes, and 72 times in poetry: 並訓美擧等 “(Those of high status) 
are all called mikoto” (NSG), 少男、此云烏等孤 “A young man,’ this is called 
wotokwo” (NSG), 絶妻之誓、此云許等度 “ ‘A pledge of divorce to one’s 
wife,’ this is called kotodwo” (NSG). 

NSK 35 

伊奘阿藝 iza agi Behold, my son. 

怒珥比蘆菟湄珥 nwo ni piru tumi ni To the moor, garlic to pick, 

比蘆菟瀰珥 piru tumi ni gathering we will go. 

和餓喩區瀰智珥 wa ga yuku miti ni On the way there, we will find 

伽遇破志 kagupasi the most splendid scent 

波那多智麼那 pana tatibana of the orange in bloom. 

辭豆曳羅波 siduyera pa The lower branches 

比等未那等利 pito mwina tori have been emptied by men. 

保菟曳波 potuye pa The upper branches 

等利委餓羅辭 tori wigarasi have been scattered by birds. 

瀰菟遇利能 mituguri no But hidden within 

那伽菟曳能 nakatuye no the middle branches 

府保語茂利 pupwogomori we spy a maiden 

阿伽例蘆塢等咩 akareru wotomye who is red, like the blossom. 

伊奘佐伽麼曳那 iza sakabaye na Come! Bloom and shine for us. 


This phonogram is the primary graph in Man’yōshū to represent to, 
appearing approximately 1080 times. 

MYS 805 

等伎波奈周 tokipa nasu Though I think that 

迦久斯母何母等 kakusimogamo to I would like to stay here 

意母閇騰母 omopedomo like the eternal rocks, 

余能許等奈礼婆 yo no koto nareba I cannot remain here 

等登尾可祢都母 todomwikanetu mo because the world is ephemeral. 

 

澄 


OJ: to OC: *drəŋ 

LH: ḍɨŋ, ḍaŋ EMC: ḍjəŋ, ḍɐŋ LMC: trɦiəŋ GO: diou KN: tiou 

NOM: chừng SV: trừng, chừng SK: cing 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This interesting usage appears once in 
Man’yōshū, in a somewhat cryptic poem. 

MYS 160 

燃火物 MWOYURU PWI mo Do they not say that 

取而褁而 TORITE TUTUMITE by taking and wrapping it up 

福路庭 pukurwo NIPA even a burning fire 

入澄不言八 IRU to IPAZU YA can be put in a bag? 

面智男雲 moti WONOKWO KU MO Will the man of the full moon 

 come, too? 

In an effort to make sense of the poem, some have suggested that 澄 is a 
mistake for 燈 ‘lantern,’ which would go along nicely with the image of 火 
‘fire’ in the first stanza. However, there are no witnesses with this reading. 
Sengaku even wonders if 澄 should simply be 登 (1978:55). I have followed 
Sengaku in dividing the stanzas as above; otherwise the fourth stanza creates jiamari. 
My interpretation of this poem has also generally followed that of 
Sengaku. 

As the headnote reads, “(One of) two poems composed by the Dowager (Jitō) 
at the demise of the Heavenly Ruler (Temmu).” Consider, further, that on the 
surface, the poet has selected Chinese graphs with dual meanings. The poem can 
also be interpreted as: the thing of burning fire / take it and wrap it / lucky road 
yard / enter clear and still, people do not say ‘eight (a lucky number)’ / face of 
wisdom the man of the clouds. Thus the poem speaks to the reader on two levels. 

 

騰 


OJ: to OC: *lə̂ ŋ 

LH: dəŋ EMC: dəŋ LMC: GO: dou KN: tou 

NOM: NA SV: đằng SK: tung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in Nihon shoki in three 
annotational notes, and 27 times in poetry. 日本、此云耶麻騰 “ ‘日本,’ this is 
read yamato” (NSG), 行去、此云騰褒屢 “ ‘pass through,’ this is read toporu” 
(NSG). 

NSK 127 

於彌能古能 omi no kwo no The child of the vassal is 

野陛能比母騰倶 yapye no pimo toku about to untie the eight-layer cord. 


比騰陛多爾 pitopye dani Before he can untie 

伊麻拕藤柯泥波 imada tokanepa even one layer of the cord 

美古能比母騰矩 mikwo no pimo toku the prince has untied his cord. 

This phonogram appears only three times in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 89 

居明而 WORI AKASITE I shall wait for you 

君乎者将待 KIMI woBA MATAMU through the night, not sleeping. 

奴婆珠能 nubaTAMA no Even if frost should 

吾黒髪尓 WA GA KURWO KAMI ni descend on my black hair, 

霜者零騰文 SIMWO PA PURU tomo black as ink. 

 

台 


OJ: to OC: *lhə̂ 

LH: thə EMC: thậi LMC: thaj GO: dai KN: tai 

NOM: đài, thai, thơi, thay SV: đài SK: thoy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram later came to replace 臺, though the one is not an 
abbreviated form of the other. See 臺 OJ: to above. The graph 台 belongs to 
the CBS, and appears once in Nihon shoki: 興台産靈 (the deity) Kogoto 
MUSUPI (NSG). There is also a somewhat strange name on a mokkan: 台床万呂 
ToTOKO Maro? (MKK 12:42). This phonogram is related to 苔 (see below). 

 

苔 


OJ: to OC: *lə̂ 

LH: də EMC: dậi LMC: tɦaj GO: dai KN: tai 

NOM: đày, đầy, dầy, SV: đài SK: thoy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears in Nihon shoki, five times 
in the annotational notes, and 35 times in the poetry: 一柱騰宮、此云阿斯毘苔 
徒鞅餓離能宮 “ ‘a palace with one pillar,’ this is read asi pitotu agari no MIYA” 
(NSG). 

NSK 9 

於佐箇廼 osaka no Though there are many 

於朋務露夜珥 opomurwoya ni who have come and entered 

比苔瑳破而 pito sapa ni the great cavern of Osaka, 

異離烏利苔毛 iriwori tomo and though many men 

比苔瑳破而 pito sapa ni have entered here 

枳伊離烏利苔毛 ki iriwori tomo and are seated before us, 

瀰都瀰都志 mitumitusi you, the intrepid 

倶梅能固邏餓 kume no kwora ga sons of the Kume, 

勾鶩都々伊 kubututui with pommel-head hilts, 

異志都々伊毛智 isitutui moti holding your stone-head swords, 

于智弖之夜莽務 utitesi yamamu will now smite the enemy. 

 

㔁 


OJ: to OC: *də̂ ŋh 

LH: dəŋh EMC: dəŋh LMC: tɦəəŋ GO: dou KN: tou 

NOM: đặng, đựng SV: đặng SK: tung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram is a variant of 鄧 (see below). 


鄧 


OJ: to OC: *də̂ ŋh 

LH: dəŋh EMC: dəŋh LMC: tɦəəŋ GO: dou KN: tou 

NOM: đặng, đựng SV: đặng SK: tung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It only appears four times in Nihon 
shoki, and some manuscripts have this simplified to 㔁. 

NSK 5 

飫企都鄧利 okitu tori Birds of the offing— 

軻茂豆勾志磨爾 kamoduku sima ni ducks gather on the island. 

和我謂禰志 wa ga winesi As long as I live 

伊茂播和素邏珥 imo pa wasurazi I will always remember 

譽能據鄧馭鄧母 yo no kotogoto mo the maiden with whom I slept. 

 

藤 


OJ: to OC: *lə̂ ŋ 

LH: dəŋ EMC: dəŋ LMC: tɦəəŋ GO: dou KN: tou 

NOM: đằng SV: đằng SK: tung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears but once in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 127 

於彌能古能 omi no kwo no The child of the vassal is 

野陛能比母騰倶 yapye no pimo toku about to untie the eight-layer cord. 

比騰陛多爾 pitopye dani Before he can untie 

伊麻拕藤柯泥波 imada tokanepa even one layer of the cord 

美古能比母騰矩 mikwo no pimo toku the prince has untied his cord. 

 

縢 


OJ: to OC: *lə̂ ŋ 

LH: dəŋ EMC: dəŋ LMC: tɦəəŋ GO: dou KN: tou 

NOM: NA SV: đằng SK: tung 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and is a variant of 騰 (see above). 

 

鳥 


OJ: to OC: *tiûʔ 

LH: teuʔ EMC: tieuʔ GO: teu KN: teu 

NOM: điểu SV: điểu SK: tywo 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ to ‘bird,’ which is a truncated form of 
tori. The earliest datable evidence of this semantogram is from the Taihō census 
(702), with the name 鳥取部 TOTORIBYE. A mokkan from the Fujiwara 
Palace (fl. 694–710) has the name 鳥羽 TOBA (MK 429). 

Kojiki contains examples such as 鳥取 TOTORI (KG), and Nihon shoki 
contains examples like 鳥見 TOMI (NSG), and 鳥籠山 TOKWO YAMA 
‘Mount Toko’ (NSG). Man’yōshū also has examples of 鳥羽 TOBA (MYS 
1757), and 鳥籠山 TOKWO YAMA (MYS 2710). 

MYS 1234 

塩早三 SIPO PAYAMI Do they stare because the person 

礒廻荷居者 ISWOMWI NI WOREBA among the rocks is a fisherwoman 

入潮為 KADUKI SURU diving for a catch 


海人鳥屋見濫 AMA TOYA MIramu because the tide is swift— 

多比由久和礼乎 tabi yuku ware wo I who am on a journey? 

 

十 


OJ: to, towo OC: *ɡip 

LH: dźip EMC: źjəp GO: zifu KN: sifu 

NOM: sập, thập SV: thập SK: sip 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader the OJ word to(wo) ‘ten.’ This usage can 
be dated fairly early, an example appears in the Taihō census (702): 十足 
TOSUKU (reading unclear). It should be noted, however, that many examples of 
this semantogram actually transcribe OJ towo instead of just to. Consider this 
example from a mokkan: 本須郡十市 Posu District (in Mino Province) 
TOWOTI (MKK 5:84). The name of this same place was later written 遠市 
TOWOTI, where 遠 represents OJ towosi ‘far.’ 

Regardless, Man’yōshū contains examples of 十 to transcribe to, such as 十 
羽 TOBA (MYS 2601) and 十方 TOMO ‘even though’ (MYS 172, 319, 345, 
346, 393 et seq.). 

 

跡 


OJ: to OC: *tsjak 

LH: tsiak EMC: tsjäk GO: siaku KN: seki 

NOM: tích SV: tích SK: cyek 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ ato ‘footstep.’ Examples appear in 
Nihon shoki: 倭跡々日百襲姫命 Princess YAMATO TOTOPI MWOMWOSO 
(NSG), 倭跡々稚屋姫命 Princess YAMATO TOTOPI WAKAYA (NSG), and 
跡見池 TOMI IKE ‘the Tomi pond’ (NSG). The kungana 跡 is used 14 times to 
transcribe the particle to in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 3265 

世間乎 YO NO NAKA wo Having taken the tonsure, 

倦迹思而 USI TO OMOPITE thinking what a distressing 

家出為 IPYEDE SESI world it is, what shall I 

吾哉難二加 WARE YA nani ni ka become if I return to the world 

還而将成 KAPYERITE NARAMU of the common man? 

There is also an example on a mokkan, though the reading is uncertain: 跡沙 
弥 TOsami (unnumbered tablet). 

 

迹 


OJ: to OC: *tsjak 

LH: tsiak EMC: tsjäk GO: siaku KN: seki 

NOM: tích SV: tích SK: cyek 

Usage / History: 

This is a variant form of 跡 (see above). 

 

常 


OJ: to OC: *djaŋ 

LH: dźaŋ EMC: źjaŋ GO: ziau KN: siau 

NOM: thường SV: thường SK: syang 


Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ to(ko) ‘eternal, long lasting.’ This 
usage appears in Man’yōshū 84 times. 

MYS 1452 

闇夜有者 YAMI NARABA It is logical not to come 

宇倍毛不来座 ube mo KIMASAZI if the night is dark. 

梅花 UME NO PANA But would you say you will not 

開月夜尓 SAKERU TUKUYWO ni come out on a moonlit night 

伊而麻左自常屋 iDEmasazi TOYA when the plum is in bloom? 

 

徳 


OJ: toko, toku OC: *tə̂ k 

LH: tək EMC: tək GO: toku KN: toku 

NOM: đức SV: đức SK: tek 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears as early as the Buzen Census 
(702), appearing in names like 徳瀬 TokoSE, 徳麻呂 Tokomaro, and 徳賣 
Tokomye. There are a few examples preserved on mokkan: 徳万呂 Tokomaro 
(MK 28), 徳女 TokoMYE (unnumbered tablet). 

It also appears in Nihon shoki in the name of an envoy who kept a journal 
that was incorporated into Nihon shoki: 伊吉連博徳 Iki [NO] MURAZI Pakatoko, 
also found written as 壹伎連博徳. His name is written as 伊岐連博得 in Shoku 
Nihongi (700.6.17). In Man’yōshū we find the names 大伴長徳卿 Minister 
OPOTOMO NAGAtoko (MYS 101) and 太朝臣徳太理 OPO ASOMI Tokotari 
(MYS 3926). 

There is also a strange stanza 烏徳自物 wotokozi MONO that appears in a 
chōka (MYS 210), which is generally interpreted to mean something as ‘like a 
man’ or ‘masculine,’ but the greatest difficulty for this interpretation is the fact 
that ‘man’ is wotokwo, and the vowels here are clearly toko. It should be noted 
that the collapse of OJ ko versus kwo is completed after Man’yōshū is compiled. 
Others have noted that this poem uses allusions to ‘Rhapsody on a Widow’ from 
Wen xuan, “I carry my orphan child to the side of the bier…Sparrows, flying in 
flocks, head for their nests in the pillars; chickens climb onto their roosts and fold 
their wings…Stroking quilt and bed-curtain, I heave a deep sigh” (Knechtges 
2000:187). Based on that, I interpret the relevant part of this chōka as: 

MYS 210 

世間乎 YO NO NAKA wo As she could not turn her back 

背之不得者 SOMUKISIENEBA against things in this world 

蜻火之 KAGIRWOPWI NO she is hidden like 

燎流荒野尓 MWOYUru ARANWO ni a heavenly white scarf that 

白妙之 SIRWOTAPE NO rises above the glimmer fires 

天領巾隠 AMEPIREGAKURI that burn in the rough fields; 

鳥自物 TORIzi MONO like a bird 

朝立伊麻之弖 ASADATI imasite she took to flight in the morning, 

入日成 IRIPI NASU and has become hidden 

隠去之鹿齒 KAKURINIsiKABA like the setting sun, 

吾妹子之 WAGIMWOKWO GA so every time the young child 

形見尓置有 KATAMI ni OKERU whom my beloved left 


若兒乃 MIDORIGWO no as a token cries, 

乞泣毎 KOPINAKU GOTO NI begging for something, 

取與 TORIATAPURU I have nothing 

物之無者 MONOsi NAKEREBA to give to him, 

烏徳自物 wotokozi MONO so like a small bed-frame 

腋挟持 WAKIBASAMI MOTI I hold him, 

吾妹子与 WAGIMWOKWO TO sandwiched under my arm, 

二人吾宿之 PUTARI WA GA NEsi and inside the spouse-hut 

枕付 MAKURADUKU where the two of us laid 

嬬屋之内尓 TUMAYA NO UTI ni our pillows drawn together, 

晝羽裳 PIRU PAMO I spend the days 

浦不樂晩之 URASABI KURAsi in lonely thoughts. 

I thus interpret wo-toko as ‘small-bed.’ This seems the best interpretation, 
which is not completely without precedent, since MYS 886 contains the stanza 
等許自母能 tokozi mono ‘like a bed.’ Thus the allusion would seem to connect 
with ‘Rhapsody of a Widow,’ where she strokes her quilt and bed-curtain. 

 

得 


OJ: toko, to OC: * tə̂ k 

LH: tək EMC: tək GO: toku KN: toku 

NOM: đắc, đác SV: đắc SK: tuk 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in the Mino Census (702) in 
names like 得米賣 Tokomemye, 得麻呂 Tokomaro, 西爾得 Senitoko, and 
万得 Matoko. This usage appears on a few mokkan: 大市得万呂 OPOITI 
Tokomaro (MK 790). 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki in the name 得許 Toko, and 
得志 Tokosi. Here it is clear the final velar could be used to show a short vowel 
in the next mora that was velar initial, as well as the velar plus a vowel could be 
used to create a second mora altogether. The name 伊岐連博得 Iki [NO] 
MURAZI Pakatoko appears in Shoku Nihongi (700.6.17). 

This phonogram also appears 24 times in Man’yōshū, but most of these 
represent to. 

MYS 4126 

安麻能我波 amanogapa If there were a bridge 

波志和多世良波 pasi wataseraba that spanned the river of heaven, 

曽能倍由母 sono pe yu mo then I would cross 

伊和多良佐牟乎 iwatarasamu wo over the top of it to meet you, 

安吉尓安良受得物 aki ni arazu tomo regardless that it is not autumn. 

 

對 


OJ: tu OC: *tûts 

LH: tuəs EMC: twâih GO: tai KN: tui 

NOM: đối, đỗi SV: đối SK: toy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. The most famous example is of the 
island 對馬 *tuəs-ma, representing something close to the modern reading of 
tusima, perhaps *təsima or *tusima. Other examples of this phonogram in Wei 
zhi are the toponyms: 對盧 *tuəs-lɑ (in Koguryŏ), and 對蘇 *tuəs-sɔ (in Wa). 


In Koryŏgi it says, 其國建九等、其一曰吐捽、比一品、舊名大對慮 
“Koguryŏ established a nine-rank system (of government). The first is called thadzuət, 
which is comparable to the First Rank. The old name of this rank was tatuəs-
liah” (Takeuchi 1977:33). This character fell out of use and only survives 
later in the name of the island Tsushima (対馬). 

 

豆 


OJ: tu OC: *dôh 

LH: doh EMC: dəuh GO: du KN: tou 

NOM: đậu SV: đậu SK: twu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. The following toponyms appear on the 
Kwangkaytho stele: 豆奴城 *to-nwo fortress, 豆比鴨岑韓 *to-pi-ʔaɨp-dz̘ imkara. 
Vowel raising changed /to/ to /tu/. This phonogram also appears in the 
Taihō census (702), but in all cases it is used to write female names with the 
suffix 豆女 tuMYE. It also appears several times on mokkan, though it is 
sometimes difficult to know if this is tu or du: 弖豆支女 TetukiMYE (MK 204), 
□支豆里 Xkitu Village (MK 1195). 

This graph is used once in Kojiki for the voiceless tu: 

KK 78 

阿志比紀能 asipikwi no Weary from climbing 

夜麻陀袁豆久理 yamada wo tukuri I cultivated mountain land. 

夜麻陀加美 yamadakami The mountain being high 

斯多備袁和志勢 sitabwi wo wasise I buried irrigation pipes. 

志多杼比爾 sitadopi ni Secretly I visited my wife. 

和賀登布伊毛袁 wa ga topu imwo wo My beloved who I visited— 

斯多那岐爾 sitanaki ni thus I cry to myself. 

和賀那久都麻袁 wa ga naku tuma wo I weep for my spouse. 

許存許曾波 kozo koso pa It was last night 

夜須久波陀布禮 yasuku pada pure that our flesh calmly touched. 

There are several of examples of this voiceless tu in the annotational notes of 
Shoki: 圓此云豆夫羅 “ ‘Circular’ this is read tubura” (NSG), 頭槌此云箇歩 
豆智 “ ‘Pommel-head mallet’ this is read kabututi” (NSG). See the same graph 
under du. 

 

都 


OJ: tu OC: *tâ 

LH: tɑ > tɔ EMC: tuo GO: tu KN: to 

NOM: đô, đo, đua SV: đô SK: two 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It appears that vowel raising occurred 
sometime before the EJS era: tɔ > tu. This graph appears in the Suiko era corpus: 
凡牟都和希王 Prince Pomutu Wakwi, 伊波都久和希 Ipatuku Wakwi, 都奴 
牟斯君 Tunumusi KIMI. This phonogram appears in the liturgies: 大海爾舟満 
都都気弖。自陸往道者荷緒縛堅弖磐根木根履佐久彌弖。馬爪至留限。長 
道無間久立都都気弖狭國者広久 OPOUMI ni PUNE MITEtudukete, KUGA 
YWORIYUKU MITI PA NI [NO] WO YUPIKATAMEte, IPANE KINE PUMIsakumite, UMA 
[NO] TUME [NO] ITARITODOMARU KAGIRI, NAGAMITI MA NAKU TATEtudukete “And 
continue to fill the great ocean with ships, while on the paths on land the ropes 


that hold tribute will be tightened in all areas, and the couriers will stamp through 
the rocks and the roots of trees, with horses continuing to stand without gap 
along the long road, their hooves reaching every spot…” (NT 1). This 
phonogram appears on a variety of mokkan: 都 麻 郷 Tuma Village 
(unnumbered tablet), 召都牟自 ‘…summon Tumuzi…’ (unnumbered tablet), 
伊都支宮奴婢 ‘male and female slaves of the Ituki Palace’ (MK 1013). 

This phonogram is also the standard graph in Kojiki to transcribe tu: 伊都之 
尾羽張 Itu NO WOPAPARI (name, KG), 豫母都志許賣 yomotu sikomye ‘the 
deity Yomotsu Shikome’ (of the pass to Hades, KG). There are also many 
examples in the poetry: 

KK 10 

意佐賀能 osaka no Though there are many 

意富牟盧夜爾 opomurwoya ni who have come and entered 

比登佐波爾 pito sapa ni the great cavern of Osaka, 

岐伊理袁理 kiiriwori and though many men 

比登佐波爾 pito sapa ni have entered here 

伊理袁理登母 iriwori tomo and are seated before us, 

美都美都斯 mitumitusi you, the intrepid 

久米能古賀 kume no kwo ga the sons of the Kume, 

久夫都都伊 kubututui with pommel-head hilts, 

伊斯都都伊母知 isitutui moti holding your stone-hilt swords, 

宇知弖斯夜麻牟 utitesi yamamu will now smite the enemy. 

美都美都斯 mitumitusi You, the intrepid 

久米能古良賀 kume no kwora ga sons of the Kume, 

久夫都都伊 kubututui with pommel-head hilts, 

伊斯都都伊母知 isitutui moti holding your stone-hilt swords, 

伊麻宇多婆余良斯 ima utaba yorosi it is well if you strike now. 

This phonogram is also used quite frequently in Nihon shoki. It appears 16 
times in the annotational notes, and 50 times in the poetry. 

NSK 96 

野絁磨倶儞 yasima kuni I searched the eight islands 

都磨々祁哿泥底 tuma makikanete but could not find a spouse. 

播屢比能 parupi no Under the spring sun 

哿須我能倶儞々 kasuga no kuni ni in the land of Kasuga 

倶波絁謎嗚 kupasi mye wo I had heard that 

阿利等枳々底 ari to kikite there was a beautiful maiden. 

與慮志謎嗚 yorosi mye wo I had heart that 

阿利等枳々底 ari to kikite there was a proper woman. 

莽紀佐倶 makwi saku A fine grain of wood, 

避能伊陀圖嗚 pi no itatwo wo I pushed opened that door 

飫斯毘羅枳 osipiraki made of Japanese cypress. 

倭例以梨魔志 ware irimasi I went inside 

阿都圖唎 atwo twori and held her leg, 

都麼怒唎絁底 tumadworisite holding the edge of her hem, 

魔倶囉圖唎 makura twori holding her pillow— 

伊慕我堤嗚 imo ga te wo holding my spouse. 

倭例儞魔柯斯毎 ware ni makasime I wrapped her hand 


倭我堤嗚麼 wa ga te woba around my waist 

伊慕儞魔柯絁毎 imo ni makasime and she my arm— 

麼左棄逗囉 masakwidura wrapped it around her. 

多々企阿藏播梨 tataki azapari And like a vine, 

矢洎矩矢慮 sisikusiro we caressed, intertwined. 

于魔伊禰矢度儞 umai nesi two ni We slept deeply, 

儞播都等唎 nipatu tori sweet like meat on a skewer. 

柯稽播儺倶儺梨 kakye pa nakunari The fowl I keep 

奴都等利 nwotu tori have begun to cackle. 

枳蟻矢播等余武 kigisi pa toyomu And in the fields 

婆絁稽矩謨 pasikyeku mo the pheasants add their call. 

伊麻娜以播孺底 imada ipazute The dawn has already come 

阿開儞啓梨 akenikyeri before I have been able 

倭蟻慕 wagimo to confess my feelings, my love. 

This is the main phonogram used to represent tu in Man’yōshū, appearing 
roughly 1072 times in the anthology. 

MYS 2 

海原波 UNAPARA pa Over the plain of the sea 

加萬目立多都 kamaME TATItatu sea gulls were ascending. 

怜 國曽 UMASI KUNI so What a splendid land— 

蜻嶋 AKIDUSIMA the islands of the dragonful— 

八間跡能國者 YAMATO no KUNI PA the land of Yamato is! 

This phonogram is found over 30 times in the poems of the Buddhist 
footprints monument. 

BSS 7 

麻須良乎乃 masurawo no The prints stamped 

布美於祁留阿止波 pumiokyeru ato pa by the excellent man 

伊波乃宇閇尓 ipa no upe ni still remain today 

伊麻毛乃己礼利 ima mo nokoreri on top of the stone. 

美都々志乃覇止 mitutu sinopye to We say, “Praise them as you look.” 

奈賀久志乃覇止 nagaku sinopye to We say, “Praise them forever.” 

 

通 


OJ: tu OC: *lhôŋ 

LH: thoŋ EMC: thuŋ GO: tuu KN: tou 

NOM: thống, thong SV: thông SK: thwong 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This appears on a mokkan excavated 
from the Heijō Palace ruins: 山 代 内 都 通 岐 YAMASIRO UTItutuki 
(unnumbered tablet). This phonogram also appears 15 times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 282 

角障經 TUNWOSAPAPU Covered in vines, Iware— 

石村毛不過 IPARE mo SUGWIZU we have not even passed it. 

泊瀬山 PATUSE YAMA When will we 

何時毛将超 ITUKA mo KWOYEMU cross over Mount Hatsuse? 

夜者深去通都 YWO PA PUKEtutu The night continues to deepen. 

This phonogram appears in Shoku Nihongi in the name 大神朝臣通守 
OPOMIWA ASOMI TuMORI (724.2.22). 


追 


OJ: tu OC: *trui 

LH: ṭui EMC: ṭwi GO: tui KN: tui 

NOM: choai, truy SV: truy SK: thoy, chwyu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only in Man’yōshū, roughly 
86 times. 

MYS 3726 

己能許呂波 kono koro pa Let us spend this time 

古非都追母安良牟 kwopwitutu mo aramu while we yearn for each other. 

多麻久之氣 tamakusike After the dawn breaks, 

安氣弖乎知欲利 akete woti ywori like a jeweled comb box, 

須辨奈可流倍思 subye nakaru besi nothing else can be done. 

 

丑 


OJ: tu OC: *rhuʔ 

LH: ṭhuʔ EMC: ṭhjəuʔ GO: tiu KN: tiu 

NOM: sửu SV: sửu SK: chywu 

Usage / History: 

This rare usage phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in a name found in 
a tax register from Izumo that is dated 739: 丑牟自賣 Tumuzimye. 

 

川 


OJ: tu OC: *k-hlun 

LH: tśuan EMC: tśjwän GO: semu KN: sen 

NOM: xuyên SV: xuyên SK: chyen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The use of this phonogram may have 
been influenced by the graph 州 (LH: tśu) and its phonology, not to mention the 
graphic similarity. The earliest usage of this phonogram as a phonogram that I 
can locate is the Mino Census record of 702, where 川 is written consistently in 
a cursive form as つ. The phonogram is found in names like 阿尼川賣 
Anetumye, 嶋川賣 SIMAtumye, and 多米川賣 Tametumye. This usage 
appears also on a number of mokkan: 山部加之川支 YAMABYE Kasituki (MK 
11313), □志川□ XsituX meaning unclear (MK 6). 

There is one example in Man’yōshū, which Ōno apparently did not notice (cf. 
1977:490–498). It appears in the stanza 奈介伎都々 / 安我末川君我 / 許登 
乎波里 nagekitutu / a ga matu KIMI ga / koto wopari ‘While I lament, the lord I 
have waited for finishes his assignment…’ (MYS 4116). 

This somewhat rare usage also appears twice in Hitachi fudoki: 器仗俗曰伊 
川乃 “ ‘weapon’ which the locals call ituno.” There is also the word 加支川爾 
kakituni, which scholars believe refers to a type of pigment used in painting. As 
mentioned above, the cursive form of this phonogram yields hiragana つ as 
well as katakana ツ. 

 

菟 


OJ: tu OC: *lâ 

LH: thɑ > thɔ EMC: thɔ LMC: tɦuə GO: tu KN: to 

NOM: thố, thỏ, đồ SV: thố, thỏ SK: two, thwo 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and even though it appears only in 
Nihon shoki, 54 times in the poetry, I have placed it in the LJS. The CBS strata 
would have it read two, but this did not happen. 

NSK 35 

伊奘阿藝 iza agi Behold, my son. 

怒珥比蘆菟湄珥 nwo ni piru tumi ni To the moor, garlic to pick, 

比蘆菟瀰珥 piru tumi ni gathering we will go. 

和餓喩區瀰智珥 wa ga yuku miti ni On the way there, we will find 

伽遇破志 kagupasi the most splendid scent 

波那多智麼那 pana tatibana of the orange in bloom. 

辭豆曳羅波 siduyera pa The lower branches 

比等未那等利 pito mwina tori have been emptied by men. 

保菟曳波 potuye pa The upper branches 

等利委餓羅辭 tori wigarasi have been scattered by birds. 

瀰菟遇利能 mituguri no But hidden within 

那伽菟曳能 nakatuye no the middle branches 

府保語茂利 pupwogomori we spy a maiden 

阿伽例蘆塢等咩 akareru wotomye who is red, like the blossom. 

伊奘佐伽麼曳那 iza sakabaye na Come! Bloom and shine for us. 

 

頭 


OJ: tu OC: *dô 

LH: do EMC: dəu LMC: tɦəw GO: du KN: tou 

NOM: đầu SV: đầu SK: twu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. There are two examples in the 
annotational notes of Nihon shoki: 広津此云比慮岐頭 “ ‘Vast ferry’ this is read 
piroki tu” (NSG), 倭文此云之頭於利 “ ‘Traditional Japanese weaving’ this is 
read situori” (NSG). 

Hitachi fudoki contains a poem with this phonogram. 

許智多雞波 kotitakyeba As the rumors are painful 

乎婆頭勢夜麻能 wobatuse yama no let us hide ourselves 

伊波歸爾母 ipakwi nimo in the stone enclosure 

爲弖許母郎奈牟 wite komoranamu on Mount Obatsuse. 

奈古非敍和支母 na kwopwi so wagimo Do not yearn for me, my love. 

 

屠 


OJ: tu OC: *dâ 

LH: da EMC: duo LMC: tɦuə GO: do, du KN: to 

NOM: đồ SV: đồ SK: two, cye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and it appears once in a poem in Nihon 
shoki: 

NSK 13 

瀰都瀰都志 mitumitusi You, the intrepid 

倶梅能故邏餓 kume no kwora ga sons of the Kume— 

介耆茂等珥 kakimoto ni at the base of the fence 


阿波赴珥破 apa pu nipa in the millet field 

介瀰羅毘苔茂苔 kamira pitomoto there is one fetid leek. 

曾廼餓毛苔 sono ga moto As one would pull it 

曾禰梅屠那藝弖 so ne me tunagite by root and by stem, 

于笞弖之夜莽務 utitesi yamamu we will utterly smite them. 

 

途 


OJ: tu OC: *lâ 

LH: dɑ EMC: duo LMC: tɦuə GO: do, du KN: to 

NOM: đồ SV: đồ SK: two 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This graph appears once in a poem in 
Nihon shoki: 

NSK 12 

哆々奈梅弖 tatanamete With our shields arrayed 

伊那瑳能椰摩能 inasa no yama no we have fought many battles 

虚能莽由毛 ko no mayu mo on Mount Inasa, 

易喩耆摩毛羅毘 iyuki mamworapi going through the trees 

多々介陪麼 tatakapeba and watching the enemy. 

和例破椰隈怒 ware pa ya wenu Thus are we famished. 

之摩途等利 simatutori Birds of the island— 

宇介譬餓等茂 ukapi ga tomo come now to our rescue, 

伊莽輸開珥虚禰 ima suke ni kone you friends of the cormorants. 

 

徒 


OJ: tu OC: *dâ 

LH: dɑ EMC: duo LMC: tɦuə GO: do KN: to 

NOM: đồ, đò, trò SV: đồ SK: two 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears once in an annotational note 
in the third book of Nihon shoki: 一柱騰宮此云阿斯毘苔徒鞅餓離能宮 “ ‘A 
palace with one pillar,’ this is read asi pitotu agari no MIYA” (NSG). 

 

突 


OJ: tu OC: *thût or *dût 

LH: thuət, duət EMC: thwət, dwət LMC: tɦut GO: doti KN: totu 

NOM: đột SV: đột SK: twol 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears once in the first book of 
Nihon shoki, used to introduce the fire deity whose birth kills Izanami: 軻遇突智 
kagututi. Ōno (1977:812) believes this graphic usage represents the personality 
of this deity. This is an interesting theory, because if we look at the semantics of 
the phonograms of this deity’s name we have “damaged axle-meet-emerge 
suddenly-wisdom.” It would appear that the compiler of Shoki picked the graphs 
for a specific reason. On the other hand, it is also possible that 突 was also 
selected with its -t final to introduce the final graph, which is t- initial. 

 

圖 


OJ: tu OC: *dâ 

LH: dɑ EMC: duo LMC: tɦuə GO: du KN: to 

NOM: đồ SV: đồ SK: two 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This graph appears in two annotational 
notes in the record of Great King Jinmu in Nihon shoki: 顕齋此云于圖詩怡破 
毘 “ ‘Visible ritual’ this is read utusi ipapi” (NSG), 秀真国此云袍圖莽句儞 
“ ‘Superior true land’ this is read potuma kuni” (NSG). 

 

覩 


OJ: tu OC: *tâʔ 

LH: tɑʔ EMC: tuoʔ LMC: tuə GO: tu KN: to 

NOM: đỏ SV: đổ SK: two 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in one poem in Nihon shoki: 

NSK 97 

莒母唎矩能 kumoriku no In the hidden land, 

簸覩細能哿波庚 patuse no kapa yu the bamboo flowing down 

那峨礼倶屢 nagarekuru the Hatsuse River— 

駄開能 take no wonderful, flourishing bamboo 

以矩美娜開余嚢開 ikumidake yodake with long joints and leaves. 

 

津 


OJ: tu OC: *tsin 

LH: tsin EMC: tsjen GO: sin KN: sin 

NOM: NA SV: tân SK: cin 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram is a kungana, where 津 ‘ford’ suggests to the reader OJ tu 
‘port, ferry.’ The earliest dateable example of this graph is from the Taihō census 
(702): 津嶋連 TUSIMA MURAZI, 志津加比賣 SiTUka Pimye, and 牟下津辺 
MugyeTUpye. 

This kungana appears in Kojiki. Ōno (1977:213) notes that this kungana is 
used 160 times in Kojiki, compared to 160 times for 都. While the total numbers 
are a perfect match, the distribution is different: One hundred cases of 津 appear 
in the first book of Kojiki, while only 35 cases of 都 appear in the first book: 津 
嶋 TUSIMA (KG), 大綿津見神 the deity OPOWATATUMI (KG), and the 
deity 速秋津日子神 PAYA AKITU PIKWO (KG). 

This graph is also used frequently in Nihon shoki, 252 times according to 
Ōno (1977:803). Like Kojiki, many names of deities and toponyms are written 
with 津 : 豊 秋津洲 TOYO AKITU SIMA (NSG), 経津主 神 the deity 
PUTUNUSI (NSG), and 泉津日狭女 YOMOTU PISAMYE Hisame maiden of 
Yomotu (NSG). 

Man’yōshū has numerous examples of this usage in its poetry. 

MYS 15 

渡津海乃 WATATUMI no The setting sun illuminates 

豊旗雲尓 TOYO PATA KUMWO ni the eternal banner clouds 

伊理比紗之 iribi sasi over the great sea— 

今夜乃月夜 KOYOPI no TUKUYWO may the moon this evening 

清明己曽 SAYAKEKARI koso be bright and clear. 

 


筑 


OJ: tuka, tuki, tuku OC: *truk 

LH: ṭuk EMC: ṭjuk GO: tiku KN: tiku 

NOM: NA SV: trúc SV: chywuk 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The most well known example is 筑紫 
Tukusi (island) which appears in Kojiki and Nihon shoki. In a wooden document 
(mokkan) excavated from the Fujiwara Palace ruins (fl. 694–710) we find 筑志 
前 Tukusi [NO] MITI [NO] KUTI (unnumbered tablet). Shoku Nihongi contains 
toponyms like 筑紫 Tukusi (697.11.11), and 常陸國筑波郡 PITATI Province 
Tukupa District (767.3.14). 

Another wooden document excavated from the Nara Capital contains the 
toponym 信濃國筑摩郡 Tukama District of Sinanwo Province (MKK 4:15). 
Another dated document excavated from Shiga Prefecture contains the phrase 遠 
江国長下郡伊筑郷天平十六年七月 “TOPOTU APUMI Lower Naga District 
Ituku Village. Seventh month of the sixteenth year of Tenpyō (744)…” (MKK 
18:101). 

Izumo fudoki preserves the name 筑陽川 Tukiya River. Hitachi fudoki 
contains a number of examples of this phonogram, the most famous being 筑波 
Tukupa. There is also the name 夜筑斯 Yatukusi. There is also a somewhat 
problematic toponym found in Hitachi fudoki: 密筑 which is glossed Mituki. 
As 密 is mitu, it is possible that this is actually Mitutuki, but as with so many 
other examples, it is possible this is actually mit-tuki, with a geminate showing a 
short vowel in the first mora. For now I follow the reading of mituki. 

 

築 


OJ: tuku OC: *truk 

LH: ṭuk EMC: ṭjuk GO: tiku KN: tiku 

NOM: trốc SV: trúc SV: chywuk 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears once in a Nara era document 
in the possession of Shōsōin: 築志 Tukusi. 

 

竹 


OJ: tuku OC: *truk 

LH: ṭuk EMC: ṭjuk GO: tiku KN: situ 

NOM: trúc SV: trúc, chúc SV: cywuk 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in a tax record from Izumo 
dated 739: 竹良賣 Tukuramye. In Nara era documents in the possession of 
Shōsōin we find 竹志 Tukusi, 竹良賣 Tukuramye, and 乎竹志 Wotukusi. 
Nihon shoki contains examples like 竹斯嶋 Island of Tukusi (NSG) and 采女 
臣竹羅 UNEMYE OMI Tukura (NSG). This last name is glossed Tikura in the 
texts, but for the time being I leave it here. 

 

竺 


OJ: tuku OC: *tûk 

LH: touk EMC: tuok GO: tiku, toku KN: diku 

NOM: trúc SV: trúc SV: chywuk, twok 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in the Chikuzen Census of 
702 in the name 竺志賣 Tukusimye. There is also a name in Harima fudoki: 
故名阿豆 ‘Thus it was named Atu.’ However, the critical text actually has 阿笠. 
Ōno argues (1977:527, n. 47) that this should actually be emended to 阿姜, the 
final graph being a variant of 竺. 

 

敦 


OJ: tunu OC: *tûn 

LH: tuən EMC: twən GO: ton (tun?) KN: ton 

NOM: đôn SV: đôn SV: twon, tan, thoy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram is used to represent the 
toponym Tunuga: 敦我 (Nara document, Shōsōin), 敦加 (Nara document, 
Shōsōin), and 敦賀 (Shoku Nihongi, 765.5.7). 

 

綴 


OJ: tutu OC: *trot or *trots 

LH: ṭyat or ṭyas EMC: ṭjwät, ṭjwäih GO: teti KN: tei 

NOM: xuýt, choét SV: xuyết, chuế SV: chyel, chye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This appears in a Nara era document in 
possession of Shōsōin: 綴喜 Tutuki. The same toponym appears in Shoku 
Nihongi: 綴喜郡 Tutuki District (711.1.2). 

 

都 


OJ: two OC: *tâ 

LH: tɑ > tɔ EMC: tuo GO: tu KN: to 

NOM: đô, đo,đua SV: đô SK: two 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in Wei zhi to transcribe the 
following personal names or toponyms: 都市牛利 *tɔ-si-ŋgu-ri ‘personal name,’ 
都支 *tɔ-ke ‘place name,’ and 好古都 * ho-kɔ-tɔ ‘place name.’ 

This phonogram also appears in Silla inscriptions: the Naengsu-ri stone 
inscription has the personal name 至都盧 *ti-tɔ-lɔ. The following examples 
appear in Korean proper nouns preserved in Nihon shoki, with the reading 
preserved in Shoki, and a possible Paekche reading in brackets: 新齊都媛 
Princess Sisetu (possibly Siseto), 佐魯麻都 Sarwomatu (or Saro Mato), 沙都 
嶋 Satwo Island. Likely by the time of the Paekche records, the Go-on reading 
of 都 had already raised to tu, and thus it would have been read that way at the 
Yamato court. This phonogram then reappears on wooden documents excavated 
from the Fujiwara Palace ruins (fl. 694–710): 多々那都久 tatanatuku “one 
placed upon another” (unnumbered tablet) or 依 都 利 eturi “crossbeam” 
(unnumbered tablet), showing that 都 generally was still used to transcribe tu. 

With the importation of the more innovative Chang’an dialect of Chinese, 
this graph was occasionally used to transcribe two. The earliest attested examples 
are from the Nara era, but there are only two examples: 安都 (or 阿都) atwo 
and 伊都郡 Itwo District. The first name is also written 阿刀, but the rendition 
with 都 is found more often, likely a favored usage because of the semantics 
with ‘capital.’ The same is likely true of Itwo, a place name in Kyūshū, and one 


that is believed to correspond to one of the states the Chinese recorded in Wei 
zhi: 伊都. 

Interestingly, Nihon shoki, with its innovative orthography based on 
Chang’an Chinese, rarely used 都 to transcribe two. It appears once in a poem, 
where 都 represents both tu and two: 

NSK 96 

倭例以梨魔志 ware irimasi I went inside 

阿都圖唎 atwo twori and held her leg, 

都麼怒唎絁底 tumadworisite holding the edge of her hem, 

魔倶囉圖唎 makura twori holding her pillow— 

伊慕我堤嗚 imo ga te wo holding my spouse. 

Notice that in this poem 都 represents tu four times: twice in tuma ‘spouse,’ 
and once each in nipatu ‘in the yard’ and nwotu ‘in the field.’ It appears once as 
阿都圖唎 atwo twori ‘hold her leg.’ 

According to Jidai betsu kokugo daijiten, this phonogram is also used in 
Man’yōshū (1967:897) to represent two, but this is disputed by Ōno (1977:516– 
517). I have found one name of a poet, 安 都宿祢年足 Atwo Sukune 
TOSITARI, in Man’yōshū (MYS 663). 

 

刀 


OJ: two OC: *tâu 

LH: tɑu EMC: tâu GO: tau KN: tau 

NOM: đao, dao, đeo SV: đao SK: two 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This graph appears in Nihon shoki in 
the following Paekche and Silla names: 刀伽 Twoka, and 安刀奈末 Atwo 
Nama. 

This graph also appears in the Suiko era corpus: 刀自古郎女 twozikwo 
IRATUMYE Princess Tojiko, 怒那久良布刀多麻斯支天皇 nunakura putwo 
tamasiki SUMYERA Great King Nunakura Futotamashiki, 等已刀弥々乃弥己等 
Toyotwo Mimi no mikoto Toyo Tomimi (name of Shōtoku Taishi). 

On a metal epitaph of Funa Obito dated the seventh year of Tenji (668) 
appears the name 刀羅古 tworakwo ‘tiger-child (born in the year of the tiger?).’ 
Mokkan examples include: 阿刀田人 Atwo TAPITO (MK 1945), 物部刀良 
MONONOBYE Twora (MKK 5:85), and from a fragment dated 710.4.10 is a 
fragment with the name: 阿刀部志祁太女 AtwoBYE SikyetaMYE (MK 17). 

This phonogram is one of the main graphs used in Kojiki for /two/ along with 
斗. Examples are 布刀玉 putwo TAMA ‘thick jewels’ (KG), 布刀詔戸 putwo 
NORITWO ‘thick litgury’ (KG), and 布刀斯理 putwo siri ‘firmly plant’ (KG). 

KK 5 

伊刀古夜能 itwokwo ya no Like a cousin 

伊毛能美許等 imwo no mikoto my august beloved— 

牟良登理能 mura tori no if my followers were to leave 

和賀牟禮伊那婆 wa ga mure inaba like a flock of birds…. 

The phonogram 刀 appears in one annotational note, and two poems in 
Nihon shoki: 太占此云太刀磨爾 “ ‘Thick divination,’ this is read putwomani” 
(NSG). 


NSK 42 

知破椰臂苔 tipaya pito Endowed with power 

于旎能和多利珥 udi no watari ni you potent people 

佐烏刀利珥 sawo twori ni who hold the staff. 

破揶鷄務臂苔辭 payakyemu pito si at the ferry of Uji— 

和餓毛胡珥虚務 wa ga mwokwo ni komu come rescue me, companions! 

This phonogram is the primary phonogram in Man’yōshū to represent two, 
used roughly 118 times. 

MYS 3747 

和我屋度能 wa ga yadwo no Let us say that I pine for you 

麻都能葉見都々 matu no PA MItutu while gazing at the needles 

安礼麻多無 are matamu of the pine tree in my yard. 

波夜可反里麻世 payakapyerimase Please hurry back to me, 

古非之奈奴刀尓 kwopwisinanu twoni before I die of yearning. 

 

斗 


OJ: two OC: *tôʔ 

LH: toʔ EMC: təu GO: to KN: tou 

NOM: đẩu, đấu SV: đẩu SK: twu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. While the graph does not appear in any of 
the early census data, it appears in a fragment on a wooden document excavated 
from the Fujiwara Palace ruins (fl. 694–710): 人□阿斗 PITO X atwo… (MK 
1636), which might be part of a name. There is also the fragment 斗麻都余之大 
子 ‘Prince Twomatuyo’ (MK 5098). This phonogram was generally avoided, 
because it also functioned as a measure of liquid, equaling roughly two quarts. This 
phonogram appears once in the liturgies: 久那斗止御名者申弖 kunatwo to MINA 
PA MAWOSIte “…who are known as…Kunatwo” (NT 13). 

This phonogram is one of the main graphs used in Kojiki to represent two: 
布斗斯理 putwo siri “firmly plant” (KG), 多布斗久 taputwoku “highly 
esteemed” (KG), 阿 久斗比 売 akutwo pimye Princess Akuto (KG). The 
following two songs use this phonogram: 

KK 17 

阿米都都 ametutu Like a candy-colored wagtail, 

知杼理麻斯登登 tidori masitoto or a plover, or a bunting 

那杼佐祁流斗米 nado sakyeru twome why the tattooed, sharp eyes? 

KK 18 

袁登賣爾 wotomye ni It is only to meet 

多陀爾阿波牟登 tada ni apamu to a young maiden, I thought, 

和加佐祁流斗米 wa ga sakyeru twome with my opened, sharp eyes. 

This phonogram is also used in Nihon shoki, three times in the annotational 
notes, and five times in the poetry: 太諄辞此云布斗能理斗 “ ‘Thick words of 
import’ this is read putwo noritwo” (NSG). 

NSK 41 

訶羅怒烏 karanow wo The ship Karano 

之褒珥椰枳 sipwo ni yaki was burned to make salt. 

之餓阿摩離 si ga amari The leftover wood 

虚等珥菟句離 koto ni tukuri was used to make a lute. 


訶枳譬句梛 kaki piku ya When I strum on it 

由羅能斗能 yura no two no the sound is wonderful, 

斗那訶能異句離珥 twonaka no ikuri ni as the swaying of seaweed 

敷例多菟 puretatu on a rock jutting 

那豆能紀能 nadu no kwi no out in the Yura Straits— 

佐椰佐椰 saya saya saya saya. 

This phonogram appears three times in the poetry in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 800 

父母乎 TITI PAPA wo You feel admiration 

美礼婆多布斗斯 mireba taputwosi seeing father and mother. 

妻子見礼婆 MYEKWO MIreba You feel love and affection 

米具斯宇都久志 megusi utukusi seeing your wife and children. 

 

土 


OJ: two OC: *thâʔ 

LH: thɑʔ EMC: thuoʔ GO: to KN: to 

NOM: thổ SV: thổ SK: thwo, twu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, and appears once in Kojiki: 土左国 
Twosa Province. The same usage appears in Nihon shoki, 土佐 Twosa, along 
with 土羅羅 Tworara. The rendition 土左 Twosa is also found in Man’yōshū. 
A search of over 50,000 mokkan yields the following number of spellings: 土左 
Twosa (5), 土佐 Twosa (4), 多土 Tatwo (5), 怡土 Itwo (4), 伊土 Itwo (1), 
土万呂 Twomaro (3), 土麻呂 Twomaro (1), 宇土 Utwo (1), and 土茂 
Twomo (1). Thus, this graph was used to write proper nouns, but was not used in 
any extant poetry. This phonogram appears on a variety of mokkan, but many of 
the readings are tenuous. Here are some that are secure: 怡土郡 Itwo District 
(MK 283), 土左国 Twosa Province (MK 4670). 

 

度 


OJ: two OC: *dakh 

LH: dɑh EMC: duoh LMC: tɦuə GO: do KN: to 

NOM: độ, đo, đụ SV: độ SK: two 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to CBS, appearing in Nihon shoki, once in the 
annotational notes and five times in the poetry: 脚邊、此云阿度陛 “ ‘Around 
the legs,’ this is read atwopye” (NSG). It also is used in the following song: 

NSK 124 

于知波志能 utipasi no Come out, child 

都梅能阿素弭爾 tume no aswobi ni to play at the edge of 

伊提麻栖古 idemase kwo the plank bridge. 

多麻提能伊鞞能 tamade no ipye no Mistress Yaheko of 

野鞞古能度珥 yapyekwo no twozi the Tamade House. 

伊提麻志能 idemasi no There will be no regrets 

倶伊播阿羅珥茹 kui pa arazi zo if you come out. 

伊提麻西古 idemase kwo Come out, child— 

多麻提能鞞能 tamade no ipye no Mistress Yaheko of 

野鞞古能度珥 yapyekwo no twozi the Tamade House. 

This phonogram also appears in Shoku Nihongi, once in a poem: 


SN 2 

蘇良美都 swora mitu This land of Yamato 

夜麻止乃久尓波 yamato no kuni pa which fills the firmament, 

可未可良斯 kamwi karasi does seem to be a divine land, 

多布度久安流羅之 taputwoku arurasi so it is worthy of honor, 

許能末比美例波 kono mapi mireba when I watch this dance. 

 

渡 


OJ: two OC: *dakh 

LH: dɑh EMC: duoh LMC: tɦuə GO: do KN: to 

NOM: đò SV: độ SK: two 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, appearing three times in poetry in 
Nihon shoki: 

NSK 16 

宇磨佐開 umasake What sweet sake! 

瀰和能等能々 miwa no tono no How we wish to return 

阿佐妬珥毛 asatwo nimo to our homes this morning, 

伊弟氐由介那 idete yukana going through the gate 

瀰和能等能渡塢 miwa no tonotwo wo of this, the shrine of Miwa. 

 

覩 


OJ: two OC: *tâʔ 

LH: tɑʔ EMC: tuoʔ LMC: tuə GO: tu KN: to 

NOM: đổ, đủ SV: đổ SK: two 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. I have found only a few examples of 
this graph in Nihon shoki, but mainly in toponyms: 筑紫伊覩縣 tukusi [NO] 
itwo AGATA ‘the Ito District of Tsukushi’ (NSG), 覩貨邏國 twokara [NO] KUNI 
‘land of Tokara’ (NSG). There is also one example in the annotational notes in 
Shoki: 戸母、此云覩自 “ ‘Mistress of the house,’ this is read twozi” (NSG). 

This phonogram also appears in Shaku Nihongi, in a quote from Tsukushi 
fudoki, which has been lost. There we find 逸覩 Itwo. 

 

圖 


OJ: two OC: *dâ 

LH: dɑ EMC: duo LMC: tɦuə GO: du KN: to 

NOM: đồ SV: đồ SK: two 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, appearing once in the annotational 
notes and three times in one poem in Nihon shoki: 倭文神、此云斯圖梨俄未 
“ ‘the deity of native weaving,’ this is read sitworigamwi” (NSG). 

NSK 96 

莽紀佐倶 makwi saku A fine grain of wood, 

避能伊陀圖嗚 pi no itatwo wo I pushed opened that door 

飫斯毘羅枳 osipiraki made of Japanese cypress. 

倭例以梨魔志 ware irimasi I went inside 

阿都圖唎 atwo twori and held her leg, 

都麼怒唎絁底 tumadworisite holding the edge of her hem, 


魔倶囉圖唎 makura twori holding her pillow— 

伊慕我堤嗚 imo ga te wo holding my spouse. 

 

妬 


OJ: two OC: *tâkh 

LH: tah EMC: tuoh LMC: tuə GO: tu KN: to 

NOM: đố, đú SV: đố SK: thwu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in Nihon shoki, once in an 
annotational note, and four times in the poetry: 戸畔、此云妬鼙 “ ‘lord of the 
house,’ this is read twobye” (NSG). 

NSK 6 

阿軻娜磨廼 akadama no The radiant globe 

比訶利播阿利登 pikari pa ari to is wonderfully brilliant, 

比鄧播伊珮耐 pito pa ipyedo so people may say, 

企弭我譽贈比志 kimi ga yosopisi but I have now realized 

多輔妬勾阿利計利 taputwoku arikyeri your brilliance is the finest. 

 

徒 


OJ: two OC: *dâ 

LH: dɑ EMC: duo LMC: tɦuə GO: do KN: to 

NOM: đồ, đò, trò SV: đồ SK: two 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, appearing in Nihon shoki, twice in one 
poem: 

NSK 28 

伊徒姑播茂 itwokwo pa mo Men with relatives 

伊徒姑奴池 itwokwo dwoti will fight together. 

伊裝阿波那 iza apana Commence the battle, 

和例波 ware pa shall we? 

多摩岐波屢 tamaki paru Minister Uti, 

于池能阿層餓 uti no aso ga possessing a strong spirit, 

波邏濃知波 paranuti pa does not have a stomach 

異佐誤阿例椰 isagwo are ya made of pebbles. 

伊裝阿波那 iza apana Commence the battle, 

和例波 ware pa shall we? 

 

杜 


OJ: two OC: *dâʔ 

LH: dɑʔ EMC: duoʔ LMC: tɦuə GO: du KN: to 

NOM: đỗ SV: đỗ SK: twu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It is interesting that Nom has đỗ, but 
the Nom character 笶 has the reading of duã, which preserves evidence of the 
EMC and LMC evolution of this graph. The phonogram 杜 appears twice in the 
poetry in Nihon shoki. Below is one example: 

NSK 72 

於朋摩幣 opomapye Everyone! 

烏摩幣輸區泥餓 womapye sukune ga Gather together under 

訶那杜加礙 kanatwokage the eaves of the iron gate 


訶區多智豫羅泥 kaku tatiyorane of Ōmae and Womae. 

阿梅多知夜梅牟 ame tatiyamemu The rain will soon abate. 

 

屠 


OJ: two OC: *dâ 

LH: da EMC: duo LMC: tɦuə GO: do, du KN: to 

NOM: đồ SV: đồ SK: two, cye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in Nihon shoki, once in the 
following annotational note: 撫 劒 、 此 云 都 盧 耆 能 多 伽 彌屠利 辭 魔 屢 
“ ‘firmly holding the hilt,’ this is read turugi no takami tworisibaru” (NSG). 

 

塗 


OJ: two OC: *lâ 

LH: dɑ EMC: duo LMC: tɦuə GO: du KN: to 

NOM: đồ SV: đồ SK: two 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, appearing in Nihon shoki in the 
following annotational note: 問菟、此云塗毘宇 “ ‘(The place name) 問菟,’ 
this is read twopiu” (NSG). 

 

戸 


OJ: two OC: *ɡâʔ 

LH: ɡɑʔ EMC: ɣuoʔ GO: go KN: ko 

NOM: hộ, họ SV: hộ SK: hwo 

Usage / History: 

This is one of the oldest known kunganas for two in Japan. The graph 戸 
‘door’ suggests to the mind OJ two ‘door.’ Kojiki preserves names such as 戸山 
津見神 the deity TWOYAMATUMI (KG), also 豐戸別王 Prince TOYOTWO 
WAKE (KG), 廬戸宮 the IPOTWO Palace (KG), and 苅幡戸辨 KARIPATA 
TWObye (KG). 

Nihon shoki also preserves the following: 戸畔、此云妬鼙 “ ‘TWOBYE, 
lord of the house,’ this is read twobye” (NSG). Here ‘door’ refers to the house. 
Other examples include 苅幡戸辺 KARIPATA TWObye (NSG), 廬戸宮 the 
IPOTWO Palace (NSG), and 穴戸 ANATWO (NSG). 

This kungana also appears rather frequently in Man’yōshū. A variant note to 
a poem in Book 2 of Man’yōshū has: 玉匣/三室戸山乃 TAMAKUSIGE / 
MIMUROTWO YAMA no ‘Mount Mimoroto, that is like a jeweled comb box…’ 
(MYS 94). 

 

聰 


OJ: two OC: *tshôŋ 

LH: tshoŋ EMC: tshuŋ GO: su KN: sou 

NOM: thông SV: thông SK: chwong 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ two ‘sharp.’ It appears in the name of 
Regent Shōtoku Taishi’s name, 豊聡耳聖徳 TOYOTWO MIMI Shōtoku, or 豊 
聡耳法大王 Great King of the Buddhist Law TOYOTWO MIMI. This graph was 
selected because of its auspicious semantics: ‘hear well, intelligent.’ Here the 
name works out to mean ‘eternal intelligent / quick ear.’ This usage appears in all 


records that deal with the prince, attesting to its rather early creation, perhaps 
within decades after his death in 621. 

 

利 


OJ: two OC: *rih 

LH: lih EMC: lih GO: ri KN: ri 

NOM: lì, lợi, lòi SV: lị, lợi SK: li 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ two-si ‘sharp’ and two ‘whetstone.’ 
An example appears in the surname 高志之利波臣 “The TWONAMI OMI of 
Kwosi.” The same usage appears in Man’yōshū, 利波山 Mount TWONAMI 
(MYS 4177). 

 

門 


OJ: two OC: *mə̂ n 

LH: mən EMC: mwən GO: momu KN: bon 

NOM: môn, mon SV: môn SK: mwun 

Usage / History: 

This is a kungana, calling to mind OJ two ‘door, gate.’ Examples are found 
in Kojiki: 穴門之豐浦宮 TOYOURA Palace of ANATWO (KG). Similar usages 
are preserved in Nihon shoki, such as the following place names: 穴 門 
ANATWO (NSG), 渟田門 NUTA [NO] TWO (NSG), and 山門 YAMATWO 
(NSG). This kungana appears also in Man’yōshū: 長門 NAGATWO (MYS 
1024). 

 

鋭 


OJ: two OC: *lots 

LH: juas EMC: jiwäih GO: ei KN: ei 

NOM: nhọn SV: nhuệ, duệ SK: yey 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ two ‘sharp.’ This rare graph appears 
only in Nihon shoki: 天口鋭田 AME [NO] KUTITWODA, a name for a poor 
plot of ground cultivated by Susanoo (NSG). Kuti is written with a kungana 口 
‘mouth,’ but likely refers to kuti ‘to rot.’ 

 

砥 


OJ: two OC: *tiʔ 

LH: tśiʔ EMC: tśiʔ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: đe SV: chỉ SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ two ‘whetstone,’ appearing in Kojiki 
and Nihon shoki: 眞砥野 Princess MATWONWO. Izumo fudoki records 砥神 
嶋 TWOGAMWI Island and a place called 麁砥 ARATWO. 

 

速 


OJ: two OC: sôk 

LH: sok EMC: suk GO: soku KN: soku 

NOM: tốc SV: tốc SK: swok 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ two-si ‘quick, sudden.’ This usage 
appears once in Man’yōshū: 


MYS 1718 

足利思代 ATWOMOPIte Have the boats 

榜行舟薄 KOGIYUKU PUNE pa that called out together 

高嶋之 TAKASIMA NO and rowed toward 

足速之水門尓 ATWO NO MINATWO ni the port of Ato in Takashima 

極尓監鴨 PATEnikemu KAMO arrived there already? 

Both words that begin atwo have been traditionally interpreted as adwo. Take, 
for example, the phonograms 足利 ‘leg-sharp’ atwo, which only appears twice 
in Man’yōshū. This kungana works because it calls to mind a ‘leg’ as in MYS 
3387: 安能於登世受 a no oto sezu ‘without your feet making any sound.’ A 
also appears in the word ayupi ‘leg straps.’ Naturally 利 ‘sharp’ calls to mind 
OJ two ‘sharp,’ as noted above. The apparent voicing that appears to have crept 
into the texts is likely a later phenomenon. I believe the same thing can be said 
for 足速. 

 

疾 


OJ: two OC: *dzit 

LH: dzit EMC: dzjet GO: ziti KN: situ 

NOM: tật SV: tật SK: cil 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests the OJ reading two-si ‘quick, sudden.’ It appears only 
in Nihon shoki, in the following name: 田疾來 TATWOKU (NSG). 

 

礪 


OJ: two OC: *rats 

LH: lias EMC: ljäih GO: re KN: rei 

NOM: NA SV: lệ SK: lye 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind of the reader OJ two ‘whetstone.’ This 
kungana appears in the following two place names in Nihon shoki 吾礪 ATWO 
(NSG) and 菟礪 UTWO (NSG). It also appears in Man’yōshū in the topoynm 
礪波郡 TWONAMI District (MYS 4021, 4138). There is also a poem in 
Man’yōshū with a variation, where the kungana is variant. 

MYS 3231 

月日 TUKWI MO PI MO Even if the sun and moon 

攝友 KAPARAPINU TOMO perpetually change, 

久經流 PISA NI PUru the place of the Totsu Palace 

三諸之山 MIMORO NO YAMA NO at Mount Mimoro which has lasted 

礪津宮地 TWOTU MIYA TOKORO for a long time will not. 

A note states that there is another manuscript with the final two stanzas as 
故王都・跡津宮地 PURUKI MIYAKWO NO / TWOTU MIYA TOKORO ‘the place of 
the Totsu Palace which is the old royal capital will not….’ 

 


U 

 

 

于 



OJ: u OC: *wa 

LH: wɑ EMC: wuă GO: u KN: u 

NOM: vu, vo SV: vu SK: wu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belong s to the PBS. This graph appears on the 
Kwangkaytho stele, in the following toponym: 于流城, *uru (or *wuru) fortress. 
This graph (于) also appears in the Silla epigraphic data base. On the Wicywu 
stele (539) 僧徒于□ appears, transcribing the name of a Bonze, something 
close to *to(w)uX. This graph 于 also appears in a single Korean name recorded 
in Shoki in the record of Tenmu: 阿于 au or awu. There are a few examples 
also found on mokkan: 于度部子人 UdwoBYE KWOBITO (MKK 17:35), 于遅 
Udi (MKK 27:37). 

In Shoki’s poetry, the phonogram appears 20 times in the annotational notes, 
and in 29 poems: 大人此云于志, “A man of stature is known as usi.” A single 
example from the poetry will suffice: 

NSK 105 

于泥備椰摩 unebwi yama Though the trees 

虚多智于須家苔 kotati usukyedo are sparse on Mount Unebi, 

多能彌介茂 tanomi kamo is it the young Ketsu 

氣菟能和區呉能 ketu no wakugwo no who has hidden himself there 

虚茂羅勢利祁牟 komoraserikyemu hoping for support? 

This phonogram also appears six times in Man’yōshū. Regarding MYS 1259 
and 3236 Ōno (1977:343) notes that these may actually be mistakes for 宇. 
However, the most recent textual research on Man’yōshū (Satake et al. 1999, 2:155, 
3:232) shows that the handwritten manuscripts agree that the archetype is 于. 

MYS 852 

烏梅能波奈 ume no pana The blossoms of the plum 

伊米尓加多良久 ime ni kataraku spoke to me in a dream— 

美也備多流 miyabwitaru we think of ourselves as 

波奈等阿例母布 pana to are mopu elegant blossoms. 

左氣尓于可倍許曽 sake ni ukabe koso Float us in your sake. 

 

有 


OJ: u OC: *wəʔ 

LH: wuʔ EMC: wuw GO: u KN: iu 

NOM: hữu, hỡi SV: hữu SK: yu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. There are three examples in Paekche 
material quoted in Nihon shoki. In the fifth year of Kinmei the following note 
appears from Paekche pongi: 名有非岐, transcribing the name Upwiki. There 
are also two names 有至臣 Uti OMI and 丁有陀 Tyau Uda. It is clear from the 
Shoki that 有至臣 is from a Paekche record, because one entry earlier we see 
the same person as 内臣 UTI OMI. The name of the famous scion, Swoga 


Umakwo (蘇我馬子), is recorded in the Gangōji Temple record as 有明古 
umakwo. This graph is used eight times in Man’yōshū, six of which are in the 
poetry in Book 5: 

MYS 826 

有知奈毘久 utinabiku Bending supplely 

波流能也奈宜等 paru no yanagwi to the spring willow and 

和我夜度能 wa ga yadwo no and the blossoms of 

烏梅能波奈等遠 ume no pana to wo the plum in my garden— 

伊可尓可和可武 ika ni ka wakamu how can I single out the better? 

 

宇 


OJ: u OC: *waʔ 

LH: wɑʔ EMC: wua GO: u KN: u 

NOM: vũ, võ SV: vũ SK: wu 

Usage / History: 

On fairly tentative evidence I place this phonogram in the PBS. While my 
copy of the text of the Kwangkaytho stele does not contain this graph, 
Kitagawa’s epigraphic dictionary has a photograph of this carved graph from the 
stele (1991:123). It is possible that where my copy has □婁城 ‘Xro Fortress,’ 
that this may be 宇婁城 ‘Uro Fortress.’ In the Jingū record, when the Queen is 
said to have invaded Silla, the name of the king is written 宇流助富利智干 
urudzapori tikan. This is believed to be the son of the 10th king of Silla, who is 
recorded as being named Uro, and held the 10th Silla rank of Sopulkan, which 
matches the name fairly nicely. 

This is one of the most popular phonograms used to represent the syllable u 
in OJ, but according to evidence in the extant texts, this usage appears to be 
relatively recent. As the phonogram 宇 does not appear in the so-called Suiko 
era corpus, it is tempting to assign this graph to the LJS. On the scarcity of the 
records at hand, however, such a theory likely is jumping to conclusions. Ōno 
(1962:141, 145) is a good example of this. 

This phonogram appears regularly in the liturgies: 御膳持須留若宇加能賣 
能 命 登 御 名 者 白 弖 此 皇 神 御 前 爾 辞 竟 奉 久 MIOPOMIKE MOTIsuru 
WAKAukanomye no MIKOTO to MINA PA MAWOSIte, KONO SUMEGAMWI [NO] MAPYE 
ni KOTO WOPEMATURAku ‘We announce the name of the deity Waka Ukanome 
who is in charge of the royal food, and while we worship before this deity…’ 
(NT 3). This phonogram is found often on mokkan: 宇和評 Uwa District (MK 
165), 矢田宇佐万呂 YATA Usamaro (MK 3523), and目毛美須流安保連紀我 
許等乎志宜見賀毛美夜能宇知可礼弖 MATUGE misuru APO MURAZI ki ga koto 
wo sigeMI kamo miya no uti karete ‘Apo Murazi Ki who is showing his 
eyelashes, alas, is noisy and leaves the inner chambers of the palace…’ 
(unnumbered tablet). 

There are three examples of this phonogram in the Jinmu poetry, and five 
examples in the commentary in the Jinmu record. As the research of many 
scholars has pointed out, the record of Jinmu found in Shoki was clearly put 
together independent of the compilation of the greater work, and the orthography 
is indeed archaic. I believe there is no problem with dating the phonogram 宇 
used by the Japanese from at least the era of the Taika Reforms (ca. 645). Below 
is one example of 宇 from a poem recorded in the Suiko record: 


NSK 103 

宇摩奈羅麼 uma naraba If you were horses 

譬武伽能古摩 pimuka no kwoma steeds of Hyūga you would be.... 

宇倍之訶茂 upesi kamo How true this is. 

This is the principal graph used to transcribe u in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1037 

今造 IMA TUKURU When I gaze at the clear 

久邇乃王都者 kuni no MIYAKWO PA mountains and rivers 

山河之 YAMA KAPA NO where the royal capital 

清見者 SAYAKYEKI MIREBA of the land is now being built 

宇倍所知良之 ube SIRASUrasi I see how reasonable this is. 

This phonogram and its various cursive forms give us the later form for 
hiragana う, as well as the katakana form ウ. It should be noted also that 
Seeley (1991:65) contains a copy of the Kana-ten of the Abidatsuma zojuron, 
where katakana ウ is actually a cursive form of 有. 

 

汚 


OJ: u OC: *ʔwâ 

LH: ʔua EMC: ʔᴐ LMC: ʔuə GO: u KN: wo 

NOM: ô,ố SV: ô,ố SK: wo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. This graph is almost always written as 
汙. It would appear that the Go-on reading is the oldest of the three Sino-Xenic 
readings, because by the EMC era, this graph transcribed a round, back vowel /o/. 
Ōno (1962:145) notes that this phonogram appears some five times in the Suiko 
era corpus. The Jōgūki fragment records the name of Prince Usi, the father of 
Great King Keitai, as: 汙斯王. The major impediment to a broader usage of this 
phonogram was semantic, as it meant ‘defilement’ or ‘indecent.’ It still appears 
on the Amida inscription of Kanshin-dera (658) in the name 汙麻 尾古 
Umawokwo. This phonogram appears a number of times on mokkan: 汙奴麻里 
Unuma Village (MK 160), 汙久皮ツ二升 ‘two MASU (half a peck) of ukupitu (a 
type of fish?) (MKK 27:37). 

This graph also appears once in Kojiki to transcribe the religiously important 
word ‘tub’ on which Ame no Uzume danced to get the Sun Goddess out of the 
cave: 汙気 uke. This graph also appears but once in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 

NSK 2 

阿妹奈屢夜 ame naru ya In the heavens 

乙登多奈婆多廼 woto tanabata no the jewels strung upon 

汙奈餓勢屢 unagaseru the string hung around 

多磨廼彌素磨屢廼 tama no misumaru no the neck of the Weaver Maiden 

阿奈陀磨波夜 anatama pa ya are very beautiful— 

彌多爾 mitani like the beauty of him who 

輔柁和柁羅須 puta watarasu shines over two hills, 

阿泥素企多伽避顧禰 adisukitakapikwone Ajisuki Taka Hikone. 

This phonogram is only used twice in Man’yōshū in the same poem. 

MYS 837 

波流能努尓 paru no nwo ni In the springtime fields 

奈久夜汙隅比須 naku ya ugupisu the bush warbler is singing. 


奈都氣牟得 natukemu to The plum tree 

和何弊能曽能尓 wa ga pye no sono ni in my garden is in full bloom, 

汙米何波奈佐久 ume ga pana saku trying to tame the bird. 

 

羽 


OJ: u OC: *waʔ 

LH: waʔ EMC: wua GO: u KN: u 

NOM: vũ, võ SV: vũ SK: wu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The phonogram appears twice in Nihon 
shoki in annotational notes in the second book, ‘the Age of the Gods’: 上國此云 
羽播豆矩爾, ‘The upper country is called upatukuni’ (NSG). 

This graph also appears once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 3817 

可流羽須波 karu usu pa I can see 

田廬乃毛等尓 TABUSE no moto ni the foot mortar 

吾兄子者 WA GA SEKWO PA next to the hut in the fields 

二布夫尓咲而 nipubu ni WEMITE and my beloved standing 

立麻為所見 TATImaSERI MIYU next to it, smiling. 

 

烏 


OJ: u OC: *ʔâ 

LH: ʔa > ʔɔ EMC: ʔɔ LMC: ʔuə GO: u KO: wo 

NOM: ô, o SV: ô SK: wo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It is strange that this graph transcribes 
wo back to the WS (see the same graph under wo), and yet the GO is u. This may 
be evidence of vowel raising (*wo > u). The answer may lie in the fact that this 
usage only appears in Man’yōshū (MYS 815, 816, 817, 818 passim), and then 
only to transcribe ume ‘plum.’ That rendition is 烏梅 ‘crow-plum,’ which is 
certainly a graphically motivated transcription. 

 

紆 


OJ: u OC: *ʔwa 

LH: ʔyɑ EMC: ʔua GO: u KN: u 

NOM: vò, vu SV: vu SK: wu 

Usage / History: 

This is a graphic variation of the phonograms 于汙宇. I assign this graph to 
the CBS as it only appears in Shoki. Another oddity about this graph is that it 
appears in Shoki four times, all in the same poem, suggesting idiosyncrasy: 

NSK 97: 

謨等陛嗚麼 motopye woba We will make a koto 

莒等儞都倶唎 koto ni tukuri out of the base of the tree, 

須衞陛嗚麼 suwepye woba and make a flute 

府曳儞都倶唎 puye ni tukuri out of the top of it, 

符企儺須 pukinasu and our music 

美母慮我紆陪儞 mimoro ga upe ni will reach to the top 

能朋梨陀致 nobori tati of Mount Mimoro. 

倭我彌細麼 wa ga miseba When I gaze down 

都奴娑播符 tunwo sapapu on Iware Pond 


以簸例能伊開能 ipare no ike no with rocks covered in vines 

美那矢駄府 minasitapu even the fish 

紆鳴謨 uwo mo come to the surface 

紆陪儞堤堤那皚矩 upe ni dete nageku and lament your parting. 

野須美矢々 yasumisisi And like the sash 

倭我於朋枳美能 wa ga opokimi worn by my great lord 

於魔細屢 obaseru who rules over all 

娑佐羅能美於寐能 sasara no miobi no with its dainty design, 

武須彌陀例 musubitare who is there that 

駄例夜矢比等母 dare yasi pito mo will not come outside 

紆陪儞泥堤那皚矩 upe ni dete nageku and lament your parting? 

It is interesting that 紆 appears in the word upe ‘above, upward’ three times, 
and uwo ‘fish’ once. The phonogram 紆 means ‘bend, turn,’ and perhaps the 
poet/scribe wished for a visual effect by using this phonogram. 

 

兎 


OJ: u OC: *tha(k)s 

LH: thɔ EMC: thɔ LMC: thuə GO: tu KN: to 

NOM: thỏ, thố SV: thỏ SK: tho, two 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ u ‘hare.’ This usage only appears in Shoki, and 
then only in later era poetry, specifically that found in the records Kōgyoku and 
Saimei. The phonogram did not gain much popularity. 

NSK 112 

兎都麻佐波 utumasa pa Utsumasa Kawakatsu 

柯微騰母柯微騰 kamwi to mo kamwi to will punish and chastise 

枳擧曳倶屢 kikoye kuru the deity of the eternal land 

騰與預能柯微乎 tokoyo no kamwi wo who we have heard is 

宇智岐多麻須母 utikitamasu mo the supreme deity of all deities. 

 



The name of this family, utumasa, also appears in Shinsen shōjiroku, Japan’s 
oldest extant genealogical register, and there the name is written 兎都万佐, 
showing that the spelling of this name was set. This family’s genealogy claims 
they came from a descendant of a Qin emperor. The long-standing theory is that 
the name came from piles of cotton presented by this family, but the name may 
simply be a Japanese approximation of the original pronunciation, or its point of 
origin on the continent. 

 

鵜 


OJ: u OC: *tî 

LH: dei EMC: dɛj GO: dai KN: tei 

NOM: dẽ, đề SV: dẽ SK: tyey 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ u ‘cormorant.’ The phonogram is never used 
in Shoki’s poetry or annotative commentary. Even in Kojiki, while the 
phonogram 宇 appears 143 times throughout the text, 鵜 appears only four 
times (Ōno 1977:171–175). Kojiki writes the name of the father of Jinmu, Ugaya 
Fukiaezu: 鵜草不合命 (KG). In Nihon shoki this graph also transcribes 鵜鹿々 
UKAKA ‘shining’ (NSG). 

 


菟 

OJ: u OC: *lâ 

LH: tha > thɔ EMC: thɔ GO: tu KN: to 

NOM: thỏ, đồ, thố SV: thố, thỏ SK: two, thwo 

Usage / History: 

This kungana is a variation of the older 兎 (see above). The phonogram 
appears in Kojiki a total of eight times (Ōno 1977:171) and appears in Shoki only 
in certain toponyms. The graph appears in various toponyms and personal names 
in Kojiki, such as 菟田 UDA ‘District of Uda’ (KG), 菟上王 UNAKAMI [NO] 
MIKWO ‘Prince Unakami’ (KG), or 下菟上国 SIMOTU UNAKAMI [NO] KUNI 
‘Province of Lower Unakami’ (KG). This usage is quite popular in Nihon shoki. 
A single example is quite explanatory: 菟狹。菟狹者地名也。此云宇佐 
“ ‘USA.’ USA is a place name. It is read usa” (NSG). The reading was likely 
attached because this graph 菟 is also a phonogram to transcribe tu in Nihon 
shoki (which see). Likewise in Man’yōshū this graph was used to render several 
toponyms: 菟道 UDI (MYS 7) and 菟名日 UNAPI (MYS 1801). 

 

卯 


OJ: u OC: *mrûʔ 

LH: mɔuʔ EMC: maɨw > mɛ:w GO: meu KN: bau 

NOM: mão, mẫu, méo SV: mão SK: mywo 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reading OJ u ‘hare,’ representing one of the 
animals in the 12 ‘earthly branches.’ This phonogram was introduced to the 
ancient Wa when they became acquainted with the Paekche chronology and its 
attendant calendar, which was based on the Chinese system. This phonogram 
represents the hare, number four in the cycle. Thus, with the early introduction of 
this phonogram, it likely was used with the native reading, u-sagi ‘rabbit.’ 
Clearly the ancients felt that the initial syllable was sufficient to make the 
association with the animal. That is how the phonogram came to represent the 
sound u. 

Perhaps due to this graph’s semantic representation of the hare in the 
heavenly stems and earthly branches system, most writers shied away from using 
this graph phonetically. Kojiki and Nihon shoki never use the graph. In 
Man’yōshū this graph is only used to transcribe toponyms: 卯名手 UNATE 
(MYS 1344), and 卯管 UTUTU (MYS 3280). 

 Consider, however, the following examples from excavated wooden tablets: 
阿曇郷戸主伊香連卯人 ‘IGA MURAZI UBITO, head of household, village of 
Adumi’ (MK 3559), and 卯倍阿何 Upe Aga (MKK 15:29). 

 

得 


OJ: u OC: *tə̂ k 

LH: tək EMC: tək GO: toku KN: toku 

NOM: đắc, đác SV: đắc SK: tuk 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ u ‘to get, obtain.’ This graph appears 
a number of times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2949 

得田價異 UTATE KYE NI With this unusual situation 

心欝悒 KOKORO IBUSESI my heart is feeling gloomy. 


事計 KOTO PAKARI Would you do something different 

吉為吾兄子 YOKU SE WA GA SEKWO my beloved, even if 

相有時谷 APERU TOKI DANI it is only when we meet each other? 

 

鸕 


OJ: u OC: *ra 

LH: lɑ EMC: lɔ GO: ru KN: ro 

NOM: NA SV: lư SK: lwo 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ u ‘cormorant.’ This rather rare usage 
is found only in Nihon shoki in the name 鸕濡渟 UKADUKUNU (NSG). While 
this phonogram does not appear in Hokekyō ongi, a related phonogram, 驢, does, 
glossed ru. 

 

雲 


OJ: una, uru, u OC: *wən *[ɢ]wər§ 

LH: wun EMC: wun GO: umu KN: un 

NOM: vân SV: vân SK: wun 

Usage / History: 

The phonogram 雲 belongs to the LJS. This graph transcribes una, uru, and 
u, a usage that mainly appears in Man’yōshū and later era works. It likely was 
used for the sound u because of the somewhat poetic nature of the semantics, 雲 
meaning ‘cloud.’ 

MYS 13 

高山波 KAGUYAMA pa Mount Kagu fought 

雲根火雄男志等 unebwi WO WOsi to with Mount Unebi 

耳梨與 MIMINASI TO afraid to lose his spouse, 

相諍競伎 APIARASWOPIKI Mount Miminashi. 

神代従 KAMWIYO YWORI It appears that it has been 

如此尓有良之 KAKU ni ARUrasi thus since the Age of the Gods. 

古昔母 INISIPYE mo But simply because it was 

然尓有許曽 SIKA ni ARE koso this way anciently it appears 

虚蝉毛 UTUSEMI mo that people in the present 

嬬乎 TUMA wo fight one another 

相挌良思吉 APISWOPUrasiki to get the other’s spouse. 

Harima fudoki contains one example of 雲濃 Unwo, with a note that this 
should be read 有怒 unwo to prevent a misreading. Shoku Nihongi contains an 
example where 雲 represents una: 雲梯連 Unade MURAZI (761.3.15). 

There are two examples where 雲 represents uru, both found in Harima 
fudoki: 雲箇里 Uruka Village and 雲潤里 UruMI Village. Because of the 
examples of uru, there is a strong possibility that 雲 goes back to an earlier OC 
*wər > *wən, reminiscent of 韓 *ɡar > *ɡan. Baxster and Sagart actually 
reconstruct 雲 as *[ɢ]wə[n], but they reconstruct 云 as *[ɢ]wə[r], so I have 
taken the liberty to emend their reconstruction based on these Japanese data. 

 

鬱 


OJ: utu OC: *ʔut 

LH: ʔut EMC: ʔut LMC: ʔyt GO: uti KN: utu 

NOM: uất SV: uất SK: wul 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This transcription appears in Nihon shoki, 
in names like 鬱色雄命 UtusikoWO [NO] MIKOTO and 鬱色謎命 Utusikomye 
[NO] MIKOTO (NSG). Hizen fudoki records the name 鬱比袁麻呂 Utupi 
Womaro. This usage also appears in Man’yōshū to transcribe utusemi ‘visible 
mortals’ (as opposed to invisible ghosts): 欝蝉 (MYS 443) and 欝瞻 (MYS 
729). 

 

 


W 

 

 

倭 



OJ: wa OC: *ʔoi 

LH: ʔyai EMC: ʔjwe GO: wa KN: wa 

NOM: oa, oải SV: oa SK: wa, wi 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in the ethnonym 倭 *wa-i, 
which I have earlier theorized is a first person pronoun with a suffix -i that may 
have been a subject or nominative marker (Bentley 2008:16). This same 
phonogram appears on the Kwangkaytho stele (412) 倭人 ‘people of Wa’ or 
simply 倭 ‘the Wa.’ Interestingly they are never called 倭國 ‘land of Wa,’ 
perhaps because King Kwangkaytho did not have diplomatic relations with the 
Wa. It is also possible that this usage is meant to disparage the Wa, making them 
sound like marauders. 

The Chinese history, Suishu, records that the Japanese disliked the label 倭, 
so they abandoned its use. This helps explain why the phonogram does not 
appear in many extant records in Japan. However, this was an official stance, and 
the small group of people that were literate do not seem to have had problems 
with the usage. It appears on a large number of wooden tablets that have been 
excavated in and around the Nara area. We find people named, such as 檜前舎 
人倭麻呂 PINOKUMA TONERI Wamaro (MK 81), 真人倭万呂 MABITO Wamaro 
(MK 178), 倭万呂 Wamaro (MKK 18:137). A different wooden tablet contains 
the fragment: 倭毘登廣名 Wabito PIRONA (or YAMATObito PIRONA?, MK 
7446). There is also a wooden tablet dated 己亥年□月十九 19th day of X 
month, 699. On this tablet is the name 若倭部廣末呂 WAKA YAMATOBYE 
PIROmaro (MK 42). While this graph here surely transcribes yamato, it is the 
fact that what scholars consider to be a derogatory usage is still in use that I wish 
to draw attention. 

This phonogram appears in Nihon shoki in three annotational notes and 22 
times in poetry: 美飮喫哉、此云于魔羅儞烏野羅甫屢柯倭 “ ‘oh, how to drink’ 
is to be read umara ni wo yarapuruga wa” (NSG). 

NSK 119 

耶麻古曳底 yama kwoyete Though I cross over mountains 

于瀰倭柁留騰母 umi wataru tomo and traverse the ocean, 

於母之樓枳 omosirwoki can I ever forget 

伊麻紀能禹知播 imakwi no uti pa the pleasant land 

倭須羅庾麻旨珥 wasurayumasizi that is Imaki? 

This phonogram also appears in Izumo fudoki, in the name 赤衾伊努意保須 
美比古佐倭氣能命 AKAPUSUMA Inu Oposumi Pikwo Wake no MIKOTO. 

 

獲 


OJ: wak OC: *wâk 

LH: ɣuak EMC: ɣwɛk GO: kuwiyaku KN: kuwaku 

NOM: hoạch SV: hoạch SK: wak, woyk 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in the title of an official: 彌 
馬獲支 *Mie-maʔ-ɣuak-kie, which represents the Wa word *mema-wake. I 
have theorized this means ‘Iron-land Lord of Wa’ (2008:22). This phonogram 
appears to have been used with its velar-final because it preceded another velarinitial 
syllable, thus perhaps showing the following vowel was short. The Go-on 
reading is interesting, as it shows that the phonogram did not fit terribly well with, 
at least, sixth or seventh century Japanese phonology. While most manuscripts of 
Hokekyō ongi have kuwiyaku (クヰヤク), or something close to that, there is one 
manuscript with wa (ワ) written in the margins (Ogura 1995.2:762). 

This phonogram also appears on two sword inscriptions found in tumuli in 
Japan, transcribing the same name of the king: 獲加多支鹵 Waka Takerwo. It 
is possible that the Japanese later abandoned this graph, because of its high stroke 
count, but there is one name preserved on a wooden tablet that may show the 
graph continued to be used, even if rarely: 丈部獲万呂 which I tentatively read 
as PASETUBYE Waku Maro, though it might just as well be Emaro (MK 3268). 

 

委 


OJ: wa OC: *ʔoi or *ʔoih 

LH: ʔyai, ʔyaih EMC: ʔjwe, ʔjweh GO: wi KN: wi 

NOM: uỷ, uể SV: uỷ SK: wuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in Paekche material quoted in 
Nihon shoki: 委陀村 Wada Village. Logically this should be read wida, but 
right after this village is mentioned with three others there is a quote from a 
variant source, which spells this village as 和多 wata. It thus seems fairly 
certain that this is read Wa here. Another example is the name 賁巴委佐. Nihon 
shoki has this name glossed as Pon-pa Wasa. A Later Han reading would be 
*bun-pa-ʔuɑi-tsɑi. In the Mino Census of 702 there is a name: 三委賣, 
MIwamye. There are also a few wooden fragments excavated from Nara where 
this phonogram is still used as wa: 伊委志 iwasi ‘sardines’ (unnumbered tablet), 
委尓部栗 WaniBYE KURI (MK 4). Scholars often say that 委 is an abbreviated 
form of 倭, which it may be, but as the earlier reading for 委 was wa, the 
possibility still exists that this was a fossilized usage of 委 as wa. 

Because of the shift in vowel from Later Han to Early Middle Chinese, this 
phonogram fell out of use to transcribe wa and instead came to transcribe wi 
(which see). 

 

和 


OJ: wa OC: *wâi 

LH: ɣuai EMC: ɣwâ GO: wa KN: kuwa 

NOM: hoà, hoạ, huề SV: hoà, hoạ SK: hwa 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, and appears in the earliest corpus of 
Japanese texts. It appears in a poem supposedly written not long after the death 
of Shōtoku Taishi, preserved in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu: 

伊加留我乃 ikagruga no Our great ruler’s name 

止美能乎何波乃 tomi no wogapa no will never be forgotten, 

多叡婆許曾 tayeba koso even if the brook 


和何於保支美乃 wa ga opokimi no Tomi in Ikargua 

弥奈和須良叡米 mina wasurayeme should cease to flow in its bed. 

There have also been wooden tablets excavated from the ruins of the 
Fujiwara Palace (fl. 694–710) with this phonogram on them. One example has 
the name 和尓積木万呂 Wani TUMIKWI Maro (MK 1479). Other examples 
include 伊与国和気郡 Iyo Province Wake District (MK 242), 和尓志 Wanisi 
(MK 416), 志摩国志摩郡和具郷 Sima Province Sima District Wagu Village 
(MK 2893). 

This is the primary graph to transcribe wa in Kojiki: 訓別云和氣 “The 
graph 別 is to be read wake.” 和豆良比能宇斯能神 The deity Wadurapi no 
Usi; 和禮 ware ‘I.’ 

KK 49 

須須許理賀 susukori ga I have become completely 

迦美斯美岐迩 kamisi miki ni drunk on the wine 

和禮惠比迩祁理 ware wepinikyeri that Susukori brewed. 

許登那具志 koto nagusi The wine of peace, 

惠具志爾 wegusi ni the wine of satisfaction— 

和禮惠比迩祁理 ware wepinikyeri I am entirely drunk. 

This is also the principal phonogram used to transcribe wa in Nihon shoki, 
appearing in four annotational notes, and 51 times in poetry: 沫蕩、此云阿和那 
伎 “ ‘foam-calm’ is read awanagi” (NSG). 

NSK 63 

夜輸瀰始之 yasumisisi Our great sovereign 

和我於朋枳瀰波 wa ga opokimi pa who rules the eight quarters 

于陪儺于陪儺 ube na ube na has spoken reasonably 

和例烏斗波輸儺 ware wo twopasu na by asking this question of me. 

阿企菟辭摩 akitusima But I have not heard 

揶莽等能倶珥々 yamato no kuni ni anything about a goose 

箇利古武等 kari kwomu to having laid an egg 

和例破枳箇儒 ware pa kikazu in the land of Yamato. 

This is the principal phonogram used to transcribe wa in Man’yōshū, 
appearing 506 times in the anthology. 

MYS 19 

綜麻形乃 PESWOKATA no Like the black alder tree 

林始乃 PAYASI NO SAKI no on the edge of the woods 

狭野榛能 SANWO PARI no in Hesokata with which 

衣尓著成 KINU ni TUKU NASU robes are dyed in color, 

目尓都久和我勢 ME ni tuku wa ga se you, my beloved, caught my eye. 

 

涴 


OJ: wa OC: *ʔon 

LH: ʔuan EMC: ʔwân LMC: ʔuan GO: wa, won KN: kuwa, wen 

NOM: NA SV: NA SK: wa, wan, wen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, as the KN reading would be wen or 
kuwa. This phonogram appears only in Nihon shoki, appearing in two poems. 


NSK 14 

瀰都瀰都志 mitumitusi You, the intrepid 

倶梅能故邏餓 kume no kwora ga sons of the Kume— 

介耆茂等珥 kakimoto ni ginger is growing 

宇惠志破餌介瀰 uwesi pazikami under the fence of our land. 

句致弭比倶 kuti pipiku As I will not forget 

和例破涴輸例儒 ware pa wasurezu the sharp taste of that ginger 

于智弖之夜莽務 utitesi yamamu we will utterly smite the enemy. 

 

王 


OJ: wa OC: *waŋ 

LH: waŋ EMC: jwaŋ GO: wau KN: wau 

NOM: vương SV: vương, vượng SK: wang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in Nihon shoki in the name 
王仁 Wani. 

 

丸 


OJ: wa, wani OC: *wân 

LH: ɣuan EMC: ɣwân GO: guwan KN: kuwan 

NOM: hoàn, hòn SV: hoàn SK: hwan 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears to have originally been meant 
to transcribe a syllable that preceded a nasal. This appears on a number of 
mokkan, mainly to transcribe wani: 丸 部 伊 夜 売 WaniBYE Iyamye 
(unnumbered tablet), 丸尓部刀良 WaniBYE Twora (unumberd tablet). 

This usage appears in Kojiki: 丸爾臣 Wani OMI, 丸爾之許碁登臣 Wani 
NO Kogoto OMI, and 丸爾之佐都紀臣 Wani NO Satukwi OMI. Almost all later 
usages have 丸 transcribing wani. Related to this, an interesting use of this 
graph appears once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 2362 

開木代 YAMASIRO NO It is I who desires 

来背若子 KUSE NO WAKUGWO GA to have the young man 

欲云余 PWOSI TOIPU WARE from Kuse in Yamashiro. 

相狭丸 APUSAwa ni And recklessly he says 

吾欲云 WARE WO PWOSI TO IPU that he desires to have me, 

開木代来背 YAMASIRO NO KUSE that youth from Kuse in Yamashiro. 

 

輪 


OJ: wa OC: *run 

LH: luin EMC: ljwen GO: rimu KN: rin 

NOM: luân, luôn SV: luân SK: lyun 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ wa ‘wheel, circle.’ This usage appears in 
Nihon shoki in names such as 三輪之神 MIWA [NO] KAMWI ‘the deity of 
Miwa,’ and 磯輪上秀眞國 SIWA KAMI [NO] POTUMA KUNI ‘a superior, 
country with its center high, surrounded by boulders,’ and 輪 韓 河 
WAKARAGAPA ‘the Wakara River.’ This usage also appears in Man’yōshū, but 
all examples transcribe 三輪 MIWA, a place name. 

 


曲 


OJ: wa OC: *khok 

LH: khuok EMC: khjwok GO: koku KN: kioku 

NOM: khúc SV: khúc SK: kwok 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ wa ‘circle, circular.’ This extremely rare 
usage appears only in Nihon shoki: 川曲 KAPAWA and 河曲 KAPAWA. This 
same toponym appears on a number of excavated tablets: 伊勢国河曲郡 Ise 
Province KAPAWA District (MK 6687), 安房国安房郡廣湍郷河曲里 Apa 
Province Apa District PIROSE Village KAPAWA Hamlet (MKK 12:12). 

 

曰 


OJ: wata, wati OC: *wat 

LH: wat EMC: jwɐt GO: wati KN: wetu 

NOM: viết SV: viết SK: wal, wil 

Usage / History: 

This usage belongs to the EJS, and appears in a document preserved in 
Shōsōin, in the name 曰丸 Watawani. It also appears in a document to record 
the toponym 曰理郷 Watari Village. Also, in Harima fudoki we find the name 
邑曰野 OpowatiNWO ‘plain of Ōwachi.’ 

 

穢 


OJ: we OC: *ʔwats 

LH: ʔyas EMC: ʔjwɐih GO: we KN: wai 

NOM: uế SV: uế SK: yey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Kwangkaytho stele as 
a compound toponym 韓穢 ‘the states of *ɣan (Kara?) and *ʔwiaj.’ This graph 
also appears on the Suda Hachiman mirror (ca. 500) inscription: 穢人今州利 
‘Kim-tɕuw-ri, a person of *ʔwiaj.’ There is a tendency in scholarly circles to 
interpret 穢人 as Ayahito (漢人), but I have left it as is, especially since the 
Kwangkaytho stele inscription is chronologically closer to the inscription on the 
Suda Hachiman mirror. Very likely this Kim is a person from the peninsula. 

Likely because of the semantics, 穢 means filth, this phonogram was 
generally avoided as a phonogram in Japanese texts. Having said that, it does 
appear in Nihon shoki once in an annotational note: 蹴散、此云倶穢簸邏邏箇 
須 “ ‘kick and scatter’ is read kuwepararakasu” (NSG). 

 

衞 


OJ: we OC: *wes 

LH: was > wah EMC: jwäih GO: we KN: wei 

NOM: vệ, về SV: vệ SK: wuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Punsanwang Kungli 
stele (ca. pre-660): 舎衞國 *ɕia-waij land ‘land of Śrāva’ (better known as 
Śrāvastī, which was the capital of Kosala in ancient India). 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, appearing in three annotational 
notes and five times in poetry: 湯人、此云臾衞 “ ‘person in charge of the royal 
bath’ is read yuwe” (NSG). 


NSK 97 

駄開能 take no Wonderful, flourishing bamboo 

以矩美娜開余嚢開 ikumidake yodake with long joints and leaves— 

謨等陛嗚麼 motopye woba We will make a koto 

莒等儞都倶唎 koto ni tukuri out of the base of it, 

須衞陛嗚麼 suwepye woba and make a flute 

府曳儞都倶唎 puye ni tukuri out of the top of it. 

This phonogram also appears in Izumo fudoki: 須衞都久社 Suwetuku 
Shrine. 

 

惠 


OJ: we OC: *wîs 

LH: ɣues > ɣueh EMC: ɣiweih GO: we KN: kuwei 

NOM: huệ SV: huệ SK: hyey 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The earliest attested example is found 
on a wooden tablet dug from the Fujiwara Palace site (fl. 694–710): 惠悲宗賀□ 
we piswokaX ?... (MKK 15:29). It is difficult to translate this fragment, but we 
could be ‘bait’ or ‘picture.’ Piswoka may be ‘secretly.’ Another interesting 
fragment has: □不能食欲白・恵伊支比乃 “…X could not eat, but wanted to 
say…weikipi no” (MK 1425). Both are fragments, and it is difficult to decipher 
we. This phonogram appears twice in the liturgies: 高山之伊恵理短山之伊恵理 
乎撥別弖 TAKAYAMA NO iweri PIKIYAMA NO iweri wo KAKIWAKEte “…and 
thrusted apart the haze on the high mountains and the haze on the low 
mountains…” (NT 8). 

This is the primary phonogram in Kojiki to transcribe we: 御眞津日子訶惠 
志泥命 MIMATU PIKWO Kawesine [NO] MIKOTO (KG), 御眞木入日子印惠命 
MIMAKWI IRIBIKWO Iniwe [NO] MIKOTO (KG), and 河内惠賀 Wega in 
KAPUTI (Province, KG). 

KK 4 

阿遠夜麻迩 awo yama ni If the sun hides behind 

比賀迦久良婆 pi ga kakuraba the green mountains 

奴婆多麻能 nubatama no the come visit me at night, 

用波伊伝那牟 ywo pa idenamu black as ink. 

阿佐比能 asapi no And with the morning sun 

惠美佐加延岐弖 wemi sakayekite with a bright smile 

多久豆怒能 takudunwo no with your white arms… 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, in one annotational note and 
five times in poetry: 妍哉、此云阿那而惠夜 “ ‘how beautiful’ is read ana ni 
we ya” (NSG). 

NSK 104 

斯那提流 sinateru Starving for want of food 

箇多烏箇夜摩爾 katawoka yama ni on Mount Kataoka, 

伊比爾惠弖 ipi ni wete the shining hill— 

許夜勢屢 koyaseru how pitiful is that farmer 

諸能多比等阿波禮 sono tabito apare who has fallen. 

於夜那斯爾 oya nasi ni Surely you were not 

那禮奈理雞迷夜 nare narikyeme ya raised without parents. 


佐須陀氣能 sasu take no Do you have no 

枳彌波夜那祇 kimi paya naki lord, strong like bamboo? 

伊比爾惠弖 ipi ni wete Starving for want of food 

許夜勢留 koyaseru how pitiful is that farmer 

諸能多比等阿波禮 sono tapito apare who has fallen. 

This is also the principal phonogram used to transcribe we in Man’yōshū, 
used 91 times in the anthology. 

MYS 486 

山羽尓 YAMA NO PA ni From the ridge of the mountain 

味村驂 ADIMURA SAWAKI a flock of teal quack 

去奈礼騰 YUKU naredo nosily as they fly overhead, 

吾者左夫思惠 WARE PA sabusiwe but I am terribly lonely 

君二四不在者 KIMI ni si ARANEBA as they are not you, my love. 

 

佪 


OJ: we OC: *wə̂ i 

LH: ɣuəi EMC: ɣwậi GO: we KN: kuwai 

NOM: NA SV: hồi SK: hwoy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears once in Man’yōshū. Some 
manuscripts have this graph as 廻. 

MYS 2760 

足桧之 ASIPIKWI NO Please see me, even if it is only 

山澤佪具乎 YAMASAPA wegu wo on a day when you go to the marsh 

採将去 TUMI NI YUKAMU of the mountains to pick 

日谷毛相為 PI DANI mo APASE black arrowhead— 

母者責十方 PAPA PA SEMU TOMO Even if mother scolds me. 

 

廻 


OJ: we OC: *wə̂ i 

LH: ɣuəi EMC: ɣwậi GO: we KN: kuwai 

NOM: hùi SV: hồi SK: hwoy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Nihon shoki in one poem: 

NSK 1 

夜句茂多兔 yakumo tatu Endowed with power, 

伊弩毛夜覇餓岐 idumwo yapyegaki this two-fold Izumo fence— 

兔磨語昧爾 tuma gome ni to conceal ourselves, 

夜覇餓枳都倶盧 yapyegaki tukuru I have built this two-fold fence. 

贈廼夜覇餓岐廻 sono yapyegaki we Yes, within this two-fold fence! 

Ōno (1977:719) claims that this phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, once, 
in MYS 2760, but most manuscripts agree that this is actually 佪, which some 
manuscripts have corrupted to 徊. This appears to be the source of later 廻 (see 
above). 

 

慧 


OJ: we OC: *wîs 

LH: ɣues > ɣueh EMC: ɣiweih GO: we KN: kuwei 

NOM: NA SV: tuệ SK: hyey 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The SV data appears to be anomalous, 
but consider that related graphs like 嘒 and 嚖 are both SV huệ. This 
phonogram appears once in Nihon shoki, in a poem: 

NSK 43 

虚々呂破望閉耐 kokoro pa mopedo I thought of you 

望苔弊破 moto pye pa at the trunk of the tree. 

枳瀰烏於望臂涅 kimi wo omopide I remembered you, 

須慧弊破 suwepye pa my beloved, when 

伊暮烏於望比涅 imwo wo omopide I looked up at the crown. 

Some, such as Jidai betsu kokugo daijiten (1967:903), claim this phonogram 
also appears in Man’yōshū, but if it ever did, evidence suggests that would have 
been in MYS 804, but most scholars agree that 慧 in some manuscripts is 
actually a mistake for 惠. I treat it as such. 

 

隈 


OJ: we OC: *ʔûi 

LH: ʔuəi EMC: ʔwậi GO: we KN: wai 

NOM: ôi SV: ôi SK: woy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only in Nihon shoki, and only 
once in a poem: 

NSK 12 

哆々奈梅弖 tatanamete With our shields arrayed 

伊那瑳能椰摩能 inasa no yama no we have fought many battles 

虚能莽由毛 ko no mayu mo on Mount Inasa, 

易喩耆摩毛羅毘 iyuki mamworapi going through the trees 

多々介陪麼 tatakapeba and watching the enemy. 

和例破椰隈怒 ware pa ya wenu Thus are we famished. 

之摩途等利 simatutori Birds of the island— 

宇介譬餓等茂 ukapi ga tomo come now to our rescue, 

伊莽輸開珥虚禰 ima suke ni kone you friends of the cormorants. 

 

坐 


OJ: we OC: *dzôiʔ 

LH: dzuaiʔ EMC: dzwâʔ GO: za KN: sa 

NOM: toạ SV: toạ SK: cwa 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ we ‘sit.’ This usage appears in Kojiki, 
though only three times, in the names: 額田部湯坐連 NUKATABYE YUWE 
MURAZI (KG), 大湯坐 OPOYUWE (KG), and 若湯坐 WAKAYUWE (KG). 
This usage also appears in Hitachi fudoki: 湯坐連 YUWE MURAZI. 

 

畫 


OJ: we OC: *wrêkh or *wêk 

LH: ɣuɛh, ɣuɛk EMC: ɣwaɨh, ɣwɛk GO: we KN: kuwai 

NOM: hoạ, hoạch, vệch SV: hoạ SK: hway 


Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ we ‘picture, drawing.’ This usage only 
appears in Man’yōshū, twice in a toponym, transcribing the place name Yoshie: 
縦畫 YOSIWE, 吉畫 YOSIWE. 

 

座 


OJ: we OC: *dzôih 

LH: dzuɑih EMC: dzwa GO: za KN: sa 

NOM: toà SV: toà SK: cwa 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ we ‘seat.’ This usage only appears in 
Man’yōshū in the name 若湯座王 Prince WAKA YUWE. 

 

咲 


OJ: we OC: *siauh or *sauh 

LH: tshiauh, siauh EMC: sjäuh GO: seu KN: seu 

NOM: tiếu SV: tiếu SK: sywo 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests OJ we ‘smile.’ The graph 咲 is an older form of 笑 
‘smile,’ and later took the derivative meaning of ‘bloom,’ since it appears that the 
blossom opens up and smiles. This usage only appears in Man’yōshū. There are 
only six examples, and all represent the place name yosiwe: 能咲 YOSIWE, 吉 
咲 YOSIWE, 縦咲 YOSIWE, and 忍咲 YOSIWE. 

 

爲 


OJ: wi OC: *wai 

LH: wai EMC: jwe GO: wi KN: wi 

NOM: ví, vì, vị, vơ, vờ SV: vi, vị SK: wuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, appearing in one toponym in Wei zhi: 
爲吾 *wai-ngɔ. This phonogram was generally avoided because of its more 
common function as a verb. However there is evidence in the Paekche material 
quoted in Nihon shoki that Paekche also used this as a phonogram: 爲哥可君、 
百濟本記云、爲哥岐彌、名有非岐 ‘Wikaka KIMI; Paekche pongi states that 
Wika Kimi is named Upwiki.’ This usage, though rare, appears in the Chikuzen 
Census of 702: 沙留爲賣 Saru Wimye. This phonogram also appears in Nihon 
shoki, once in a poem: 

NSK 91 

於彌能姑能 omi no kwo no The son of the Omi has 

耶賦能之魔柯枳 yapu no sibagaki made a fine brushwood fence. 

始陀騰余瀰 sitatoyomi But if the earth quakes 

那爲我與釐據魔 nawi ga yorikoba that brushwood fence 

耶黎夢之魔柯枳 yaremu sibagaki will likely fall to pieces. 

This is the primary phonogram used to transcribe wi in Man’yōshū, 
appearing a total of 48 times. 

MYS 42 

潮左爲二 SIPOsawi ni Is my beloved riding on a boat 

五十等兒乃嶋邊 IRAGWO no SIMApye rowing toward Irago Island 


榜船荷 KOGU PUNE NI among the violent breakers 

妹乗良六鹿 IMWO NORUraMU KA near the shore? 

荒嶋廻乎 ARAKI SIMAMWI wo It is dangerous around the island. 

This also appears in the Bussoku poetic sequence. 

BSS 12 

佐伎波比乃 sakipapi no The band of brothers 

阿都伎止毛加羅 atuki tomogara who are greatly blessed 

麻爲多利弖 mawitarite journeyed and saw these 

麻佐米尓弥祁牟 masame ni mikyemu with their actual eyes— 

比止乃止毛志佐 pito no tomosi sa Praise be to them. 

宇礼志久毛阿留可 uresiku mo aru ka How delighted are we, too. 

 

位 


OJ: wi OC: *wus or *wrəts 

LH: wɨs > wih EMC: jwih GO: wi KN: wi 

NOM: vị, vì SV: vị SK: wuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in Koryŏgi, 次抜位使者、 
比従五品 “Next is the bat-wih Envoy, which is comparable the Junior Fifth 
Rank” (Takeuchi 1977:34). 

This phonogram appears in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu in the name 位奈部橘 
王 Prince WinaBYE TATIBANA. Because the graph semantically referred to 
imperial ascension to the throne, and the rank one held at court, this graph was 
generally avoided as a phonogram. This graph also appears in Nihon shoki, used 
once in a poem: 

NSK 21 

波辭枳豫辭 pasikiyosi Ah, how wonderful! 

和藝幣能伽多由 wagipye no katayu Clouds are climbing upward 

區毛位多知區暮 kumwowi tati kumo from the direction of home. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, but only four times. 

MYS 2449 

香山尓 kaguYAMA ni Like Mount Kagu seen dimly 

雲位桁曵 KUMWOwi TANABIKI through the thin clouds, 

於保々思久 opoposiku will I yearn for the children 

相見子等乎 APIMI KWORA wo even though I only saw 

後戀牟鴨 NOTI KWOPWImu KAMO their faces dimly? 

 

韋 


OJ: wi OC: *wəi 

LH: wui EMC: jwei GO: wi KN: wi 

NOM: NA SV: vi SK: wuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. This usage first appears in the Gangōji 
Temple record in the name 佐久羅韋 Sakurawi. It also appears on the Nasu 
Kokuzō stele (700) in the name 那須韋提 Nasu Wide. 

This phonogram is the primary graph used to transcribe wi in Kojiki, but 
there are only 20 examples in the entire work, like 佐韋河 Sawi River (KG). 


KK 21 

佐韋賀波用 sawigapa ywo Clouds rise and spread 

久毛多知和多理 kumwo tatiwatari over this way from Sawi River. 

宇泥備夜麻 unebwi yama The leaves of the trees 

許能波佐夜藝奴 ko no pa sayaginu on Mount Unebi are rustling. 

加是布加牟登須 kaze pukamu to su A strong wind is about to blow. 

This phonogram is used in Nihon shoki, once in an annotational note, and 
once in a poem: 片居、此云伽哆韋 “ ‘The place name 片居’ is read katawi” 
(NSG). It also appears in the name 韋那公 Wina KIMI (NSG). 

NSK 57 

于知和多須 uti watasu I look out and see 

椰餓波曳儺須 yaga payenasu richly growing foliage; 

企以利摩韋區例 ki irimawikure I have come with a rich troupe. 

 

威 


OJ: wi OC: *ʔui 

LH: ʔui EMC: ʔjwei GO: wi KN: wi 

NOM: uy, oai SV: uy SK: wuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears on the Ina Mabito epitaph 
stone (707) in the name 威奈卿 Minister Wina, and 威奈鏡公 Minister Wina 
KAGAMI. I have found one fairly firm example on mokkan: □威那 Xwina 
(MK 324), which may be part of the name Wina. 

It also appears in Nihon shoki, three times in poetry: 

NSK 113 

耶麻鵝播爾 yamagapa ni There are two mandarin ducks 

烏志賦頴都威底 wosi putatu wite at the mountain stream, 

陀虞毘預倶 tagupi yoku paired off so nicely. 

陀虞陛屢伊慕乎 tagupyeru imo wo Who has taken my beloved 

多例柯威爾雞武 tare ka winikyemu who paired off so well with me? 

 

謂 


OJ: wi OC: *wəs 

LH: wus > wuh EMC: jweih LMC: yj GO: wi KN: wi 

NOM: NA SV: vị SK: wuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. The use of this graph is quite limited, 
because of its semantics, as it is a verb ‘to say.’ It appears in Nihon shoki in three 
poems: 

NSK 5 

飫企都鄧利 okitu tori Birds in the offing— 

軻茂豆勾志磨爾 kamoduku sima ni ducks gather on the island. 

和我謂禰志 wa ga winesi As long as I live 

伊茂播和素邏珥 imo pa wasurazi I will always remember 

譽能據鄧馭鄧母 yo no kotogoto mo the maiden with whom I slept. 

This phonogram appears once in Man’yōshū, in a difficult to penetrate poem: 

MYS 503 

珠衣乃 TAMAGINU no Sunken deep into the turmoil, 

狭藍左謂沈 SAWI sawi SIDUMI like disheveled robes, 


家妹尓 IPYE NO IMWO ni I came to my beloved at home 

物不語来而 MONO IPAZU KINITE without saying a word. 

思金津裳 OMOPIKANETU MO How unbearable are my thoughts. 

 

委 


OJ: wi OC: *ʔoi or *ʔoih 

LH: ʔyai, ʔyaih EMC: ʔjwe LMC ʔyj GO: wi KN: wi 

NOM: uỷ, uể SV: uỷ SK: wuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears twice in Nihon shoki poetry. 

NSK 36 

瀰豆多摩蘆 midu tamaru Water dammed up at 

豫佐瀰能伊戒珥 yosami no ike ni the reservoir of Yosami— 

奴那波區利 nunapa kuri I did not realize 

破陪鷄區辭羅珥 papekyeku sirani how far the water shield 

委遇比菟區 wigupi tuku had grown. 

伽破摩多曳能 kapamataye no And I did not realize 

比辭餓羅能 pisigara no how much the water chestnut 

佐辭鷄區辭羅珥 sasikyeku sirani had grown by the weirs. 

阿餓許居呂辭 a ga kokoro si What a fool I have been, 

伊夜于古珥辭氐 iya ukwo ni site my heart not having noticed. 

 

偉 


OJ: wi OC: *wəiʔ 

LH: wiuʔ EMC: jweiʔ LMC ʔyj GO: wi KN: wi 

NOM: vĩ SV: vĩ SK: wuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in Nihon shoki, once in a 
personal name 偉那 Wina. It also is found in two poems. 

NSK 80 

婀拕羅斯枳 atarasiki Such a pitiful waste, 

偉儺謎能陀倶彌 winabye no tagumi that inking string used by 

柯該志須彌儺皤 kakesi suminapa the Inabe carpenter. 

旨我那稽麼 si ga nakyeba If he is no longer here, 

拕例柯々該武預 tare ka kakemu yo what skilled person will remain 

婀拕羅須彌儺皤 atara suminapa to use the inking string? 

 

萎 


OJ: wi OC: *ʔoi 

LH: ʔyai EMC: ʔjwe LMC ʔyj GO: wi KN: wi 

NOM: NA SV: uy, uý SK: wuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears in Nihon shoki in one 
annotational note: 屯聚居、此云怡波瀰萎 “ ‘gather in a large group’ is read 
ipamiwi” (NSG). 

 

井 


OJ: wi OC: *tseŋʔ 

LH: tsieŋʔ EMC: tsjäŋʔ GO: siau KN: sei 

NOM: tỉnh, tểnh SV: tỉnh SK: cyeng 


Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ wi ‘well.’ This usage appears to been quite 
popular, as it appears in the earliest extant Japanese corpus, appearing in 櫻井 
SAKURAWI and 坂井 SAKAWI. The earliest datable usage is in the Mino 
Census of 702: 酒井 SAKAWI, 石井 ISIWI, and 井手 WITE. This usage 
also appears on the Ina Mabito epitaph stone (707) in the name 狛井山崗 
KUMAWI YAMA WOKA. 

This usage also appears in Kojiki in names: 名謂井氷鹿 ‘My name is 
WIPIKA.’ 狹井河 SAWIGAPA ‘Sawi River,’ and 神八井耳 KAMU YAWI 
MIMI. This graph appears in Nihon shoki in a variety of names: 井光 WIPIKA, 
神八井耳 KAMU YAWI MIMI, and 糸井媛 ITWOWI PIMYE. There is only 
one example of 井 in Man’yōshū, though it appears in a number of names and 
toponyms: 

MYS 3398 

比等未奈乃 pito mwina no Even if all the words 

許等波多由登毛 koto pa tayu tomo of people were to vanish, 

波尓思奈能 panisina no do not let 

伊思井乃手兒我 isiWI no TEGWO ga the words of my child at 

許登奈多延曽祢 koto na tayeso ne Ishii in Hanishina vanish. 

 

猪 


OJ: wi OC: *tra 

LH: tra EMC: trjwo GO: tio KN: tio 

NOM: trơ, chưa SV: trư, chư SK: cye 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ wi ‘boar.’ This usage is primarily 
used in people’s names that were born in the year of the boar. Examples from the 
Mino Census in 702 are 猪麻呂 WImaro, 赤猪 AKAWI, 黒猪 KURWOWI, 
and 猪手賣 WITEmye. There are a few examples in Kojiki: 少名日子建猪心 
SUKUNA TAKYEWI KOKORO and 赤猪子 AKAWIKWO. Examples in 
Nihon shoki include 猪使連 WI TUKAPI MURAZI, 男弟猪手 IRODO WITE, 
and 武猪心 TAKYEWI KOKORO. This usage also appears six times in 
Man’yōshū, though many represent the place name Wina. Below is a 
representative example. 

MYS 2731 

牛窓之 USIMADWO NO The violent waves at Ushimado 

浪乃塩左猪 NAMI no SIPOsaWI crash upon the shore and 

嶋響 SIMA TOYOMI cause the island to resound— 

所依之君 YOSORISI KIMI PA maybe I will not see the noble 

不相鴨将有 APAZU KAMO ARAMU whose report clamored in my ears. 

 

居 


OJ: wi OC: *ka 

LH: kɨɑ(h) EMC: kjwo GO: ko KN: kio 

NOM: cư SV: cư SK: ke, kuy 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ wi ‘to sit.’ This usage appears in 
Kojiki in one toponym: 居寤清泉 WISAME [NO] SIMIDU (KG). This same 
toponym appears in Nihon shoki as 居醒泉 WISAMEGAWI (NSG). Both 


usages are based on the story where Yamato Takeru sits at the springs and clears 
his head by drinking of the water. 

This usage also appears three times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 312 

昔者社 MUKASI KOSO Surely anciently 

難波居中跡 nanipa WINAKA TO it was called the rural area 

所言奚米 IPAREkyeme of Naniwa, but now 

今者京引 IMA MIYAKWOBIKI the metropolis has moved 

都備仁鷄里 MIYAKWObwinikyeri and it is more like a capital city. 

 

藺 


OJ: wi OC: NA 

LH: linh EMC: ljenh GO: rin KN: rin 

NOM: NA SV: lận SK: lin 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ wi ‘a rush.’ This usage appears once in 
Man’yōshū: 

MYS 3192 

草蔭之 KUSAKAGE NO While gazing out at Arai Cape, 

荒藺之埼乃 ARAWI NO SAKI no hidden in the grass, 

笠嶋乎 KASA SIMA wo on Kasa Island, 

見乍可君之 MITUTU ka KIMI NO perhaps you are crossing over 

山道超良無 YAMADI KWOYUramu on the mountain path. 

 

員 


OJ: wina OC: *wən or *wen 

LH: wun, wan EMC: jwən, jwän GO: win, wen KN: win 

NOM: viên SV: viên SK: wen, wun 

Usage / History: 

This usage belongs to the LJS, appearing in documents preservered in 
Shōsōin, in the toponyms 員辧郡 Winabye District or 員辯郡 Winabye 
District. This usage also appears on a wooden tablet excavated from the Nara 
capital site: 隠伎国智夫郡□美多郷石部員万呂 Oki Province Titibu District 
X Mita Village, ISIBYE Winamaro…’ (unnumbered tablet). 

 

呼 


OJ: wo OC: *hâ or *hâh 

LH: ha, hah EMC: xuo, xuoh GO: ko KN: ko 

NOM: hô, ho, hò SV: hô SK: hwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, and appears to have dropped out of the 
orthographic pool by the inception of the Paekche-influenced orthography. The 
initial of this phonogram appears to have transcribed a fricative, which likely 
then lenited to a glide (*h > w). Because of this reasoning, this graph is placed 
here in the dictionary. The phonogram 呼 is used to redner the names of both 
the queen of Yamatai, and her enemy, the king: 卑彌呼 *Pe-me-hɔ, versus 卑 
彌弓呼 *Pe-me-kuŋ-hɔ. There is also two toponyms: 不呼國 *Pu-hɔ Domain 
and 呼邑國 *Hɔ-ʔip Domain. 

This phonogram reappears in Man’yōshū, used a total of 22 times in the 
anthology. 


MYS 1 

我許背齒 WA kosoBA Then it shall be I 

告目 NORAME who will tell you 

家呼毛名雄母 IPYE wo mo NA WO mo of my home and of my name. 

 

烏 


OJ: wo OC: *ʔâ 

LH: ʔa > ʔɔ EMC: ʔɔ GO: u KN: wo 

NOM: ô, o SV: ô SK: wo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, preserved in Wei zhi in toponyms such 
as 臼斯烏旦國 *ɡuʔ-sie-ʔɔ-tɑnh domain, 弁辰彌烏邪馬國 *phuɑn-dźɨn-mieʔɔ-
ya-ma domain, ‘Mie-ʔɔ-ya-ma Domain of Phuɑn-dźɨn,’ and 烏奴 *ʔɔ-nɔ. 

This phonogram also appears on the Silla Chyeng-Tyey stele (536) in the 
names 大烏第尺人小烏未苐小烏一支□ *dei-tśhak of the 15th rank (Dɑh-ʔɔ), 
*dei-mus of the 16th rank (Siɑu-ʔɔ), and *ʔit-kie-X of the 16th rank (Siɑu-ʔɔ). 
Also on the Tanyang Silla stele (551) there is the name 烏禮兮 *ʔɔ-leiʔ-ɣɛi. 

This phonogram is one of the primary graphs used in Nihon shoki to 
transcribe wo, used nine times in annotational notes, and 48 times in poetry: 少 
男、此云烏等孤 “ ‘young man’ is read wotokwo” (NSG). 

NSK 54 

菟藝泥赴 tuginepu Taking my journey 

揶莽之呂餓波烏 yamasirogapa wo up the Yamashiro River, 

瀰揶能朋利 miya nopori where trees grow thick, 

和餓能朋例麼 wa ga noporeba I journeyed past the palace. 

阿烏珥豫辭 awo ni yosi I traveled beond 

儺羅烏輸疑 nara wo sugwi the blue hills of Nara. 

烏陀氐 wodate I headed beyond 

夜莽苔烏輸疑 yamato wo sugwi the aegis peaks of Yamato. 

和餓瀰餓朋辭區珥波 wa ga migaposi kuni pa The land I longed to behold was 

箇豆羅紀多伽瀰揶 kadurakwi takamiya the high palace in Kazuraki— 

和藝幣能阿多利 wagipye no atari everything around my home. 

This phonogram also appears in Izumo fudoki: 須佐乃烏 Susanowo. 

Ōno (1977:723, 727) claims that this phonogram appears in Man’yōshū a 
total of five times, but exclusively in the verb woworu. However, recent textual 
criticism now believes all five examples of 烏 to be corruptions of an original 
為 (see below). 

 

塢 


OJ: wo OC: *ʔâ 

LH: ʔɑ EMC: ʔɔ GO: u KN: wo 

NOM: ổ, ọ SV: ổ SK: wo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in the fragment of what is 
likely a name on the Silla Chyeng Tyey stele (536): 大塢□□□□ *dɑhʔɔXXXX. 
Likely this is a variant of the 15th Silla rank, often written as 大烏. 
This graph is also used in Nihon shoki, once in an annotational note, and 25 times 
in poetry: 丘岬、此云塢介佐棄 “ ‘tip of the hill’ is read wokasaki.” 


NSK 37 

彌知能之利 miti no siri I had heard about 

古破儾塢等綿塢 kwopada wotomye wo the maiden from Kohada 

伽未能語等 kamwi no goto in the land behind the road, 

枳虚曳之介廼 kikoyesikado her reputation like thunder, 

阿比摩區羅摩區 apimakura maku but here we lie together. 

 

曰 


OJ: wo OC: *wat 

LH: wat EMC: jwɐt GO: wati KN: wetu 

NOM: viết SV: viết SK: wal, wel 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in the Paekche materials 
quoted in Nihon shoki: 曰佐分屋 Wosa Bun’woku. It seems clear that this wosa 
means ‘interpret’ or ‘interpreter’ in the languae of Paekche, as this word is also 
found in Nihon shoki written as 譯語 ‘interpet speech.’ It is interesting that 
these two phonograms taken as semantograms means ‘talk-assist.’ This rendition 
is preserved in a number of wooden tablets. One dated ninth month of 762 has 
the name 秦曰佐大村 PADA Wosa OPOMURA (MKK 19:20). The Mino Census 
of 702 preserves this same name or title in 曰佐賣 Wosamye. 

 

乎 


OJ: wo OC: *ɦâ 

LH: ɦa > ɣɔ EMC: ɣuo GO: wo, go KN: ko 

NOM: hồ SV: hồ SK: hwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. This appears in the earliest extant 
Japanese corpus. In the genealogy preserved in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu we 
find names like 乎麻呂古王 Prince Womarokwo, 乎阿尼乃弥己等 Woane no 
Mikoto, and 乎沙多宮 wosata MIYA ‘the Wosata Palace.’ It also appears in a 
poem supposedly written not long after the death of Shōtoku Taishi. 

美加弥乎須 mikami wosu Mount Tabasami 

多婆佐美夜麻乃 tabasami yama no which rules from above: 

阿遅加気尓 adikake ni alas, I stood there 

比止乃麻乎之志 pito no mawosisi in the shade of the aji tree 

和何於保支美波母 wa ga opokimi mo begging our master’s return. 

This phonogram also appears on the Funa Obito epitaph, recording the name 
乎娑陁宮 wosada MIYA ‘Wosada Palace.’ This phonogram appears 173 times in 
the liturgies: 参入罷出人名乎問所知志咎過在乎波神直備大直備爾見直聞直 
坐弖 MAWIRIMAKADURU PITO [NO] NA wo TWOPISIRAsi, TWOGA AYAMATI ARAMU 
woba KAMUNAPObwi OPONAPObwi ni MINAPOSI KIKINAPOSIMASIte “He will 
enquire and know the names of the people who enter and leave (the palace), and 
if there are transgressions or mistakes, Kamu Naobi and Ōnaobi will see and 
rectify, and hear and rectify these…” (NT 9). This phonogram appears on a 
variety of mokkan: 乎波売 Wopamye (MK 3291), 久ツ乃乎由比四 kutu no 
woyupi YO ‘four (batches?) of small shoe strings’ (MK 415). 

This phonogram is used somewhat sparingly in Nihon shoki, appearing once 
in an annotational note, and in five poems: 轠然、此云乎謀苦留留爾 “ ‘the 
string turns and turns’ is read wo mo kururu ni.” 


NSK 117 

伊磨紀那屢 imakwi naru Above the knoll 

乎武例我禹杯爾 womure ga upe ni that is Imaki— 

倶謨娜尼母 kumo dani mo if even a cloud 

旨屢倶之多々婆 sirukusi tataba would clearly appear to rise up 

那爾柯那皚柯武 nani ka nagekamu then I would not lament. 

This is the primary phonogram to transcribe wo in Man’yōshū, used 2104 
times in the anthology. 

MYS 797 

久夜斯可母 kuyasi kamo How regrettable. 

可久斯良摩世婆 kaku siramaseba If I had known that things 

阿乎尓与斯 awo ni yosi would turn out this way. 

久奴知許等其等 kunuti kotogoto I would have shown you the scenery 

美世摩斯母乃乎 misemasi mono wo of this land, surrounded by green. 

An abbreviated version of this phonogram yields katakana ヲ. 

 

雄 


OJ: wo OC: *wəŋ 

LH: wuŋ EMC: juŋ GO: wou KN: yuu 

NOM: hùng SV: hùng SK: ung 

Usage / History: 

This usage is difficult to date. Since it is used to represent wo, it would seem 
to preserve a tradition that predates Middle Chinese. For now I date it as EJS. It 
appears once in Shoku Nihongi, in the surname 雄儀 Wogi (765.4.12). Most 
believe that this phonogram was used as a kungana for OJ wo ‘male,’ which I 
agree with. What I argue here is that it is possible that originally this phonogram 
was used for its earlier reading of wou, and as the name above suggests, the final 
-ŋ introduced the pre-nasalized gi of the second syllable. Later, when the Middle 
Chinese reading of this phonogram had evolved into something closer to yuu, the 
usage was reanalyzed as a kungana, which see below. 

 

袁 


OJ: wo OC: *wan 

LH: wan EMC: jwɐn GO: won KN: wen 

NOM: NA SV: viên SK: wen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, and appears once on a mokkan: 袁等売 
wotomye ‘maiden’ (MK 2243). 

This phonogram is the primary graph to transcribe wo in Kojiki. 鹽許袁呂許 
袁呂迩 SIPO koworo koworo ni “salt water made a sound of crackling”; 阿那迩 
夜志愛上袁登古袁 ana ni yasi e wotokwo wo ‘Oh my, what a wonderful young 
man.’ And 訓食云袁須 “The graph 食 ‘to govern’ is read wosu.” 

KK 53 

淤岐幣迩波 okipye ni pa There are boats 

袁夫泥都羅羅玖 wobune turaraku lined up out in the offing. 

久漏邪夜能 kurwozaya no Black like a sheath 

摩佐豆古和藝毛 masadukwo wagimwo my beautiful beloved, 

玖迩幣玖陀良須 kunipye kudarasu she heads for her home. 

This phonogram appears nine times in Man’yōshū. 


MYS 4341 

多知波奈能 tatibana no I left my father 

美袁利乃佐刀尓 miwori no satwo ni in Miori Village 

父乎於伎弖 TITI wo okite in Tachibana, 

道乃長道波 MITI no NAGATI pa and I find it so hard 

由伎加弖努加毛 yukikatenu kamo to take this long path home. 

 

遠 


OJ: wo, woni OC: *wanʔ 

LH: wanʔ EMC: jwɐnʔ GO: womu KN: wen 

NOM: viễn, viện SV: viễn, viện SK: wen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS.There are a few examples of this 
phonogram found on mokkan: 安遠郷 Awo Village (unnumbered tablet), 加川 
遠 katuwo ‘bonito’ (MKK 27:37). 

It is a primary phonogram to transcribe wo in Kojiki in the first third of the 
work. 八俣遠呂智 YAMATA woroti ‘eight headed serpent’ (KG), 打竹之登遠遠 
登遠遠迩 SAKITAKE NO towowo towowo ni ‘the drainboard made of split bamboo 
bending over with the weight (of the fish)...’ (KG). 

KK 2 

夜知富許能 yatipoko no The august deity 

迦微能美許登波 kamwi no mikoto pa Yachi Hoko 

夜斯麻久爾 yasimakuni could not marry a spouse 

都麻麻岐迦泥弖 tuma makikanete in the land of eight islands. 

登富登富斯 topotoposi Then he heard 

故志能久迩迩 kwosi no kuni ni there was a wise maiden 

佐加志賣遠 sakasimye wo in the far-off land 

阿理登岐加志弖 ari to kikasite of Koshi. 

久波志賣遠 kupasimye wo He heard there was 

阿理登伎許志弖 ari to kikosite a beautiful maiden. 

佐用婆比迩 saywobapi ni Off he hurriedly went 

阿理多多斯 aritatasi to seek her hand in marriage. 

用婆比迩 ywobapi ni He went back and forth 

阿理迦用婆勢 arikaywopase seeking her hand in marriage. 

多知賀遠母 tati ga wo mo Without even undoing 

伊麻陀登加受弖 imada tokazute the belt of his sword— 

淤須比遠母 osupi wo mo without taking off 

伊麻陀登加泥婆 imada tokaneba his cloak 

遠登賣能 wotomye no he pushed repeatedly 

那須夜伊多斗遠 nasu ya itatwo wo on the door to 

淤曾夫良比 osoburapi where the maiden slumbered. 

和何多多勢禮婆 wa ga tatasereba As I stand here 

比許豆良比 pikodurapi I repeatedly pull on the door. 

和何多多勢禮婆 wa ga tatasereba As I stand here, 

阿遠夜麻迩 awoyama ni in the blue mountains 

奴延波那伎奴 nuye pa nakinu the thrush has called out. 

佐怒都登理 sanwotu tori The bird of the true field, 

岐藝斯波登與牟 kigisi pa toyomu the pheasants are rowdy. 


爾波都登理 nipatu tori The bird of the yard, 

迦祁波那久 kakye pa naku the chickens are cackling. 

宇禮多久母 uretaku mo How vexing, 

那久那留登理加 naku naru tori ka these birds who cry out! 

許能登理母 kono tori mo Someone strike and silence 

宇知夜米許世泥 utiyamekosene even these birds. 

This phonogram appears very rarely in Nihon shoki, but it is used to write the 
name 遠智娘 Woti IRATUMYE (NSG). This phonogram also appears 57 times in 
Man’yōshū. 

MYS 191 

毛許呂裳遠 KEkoroMO wo When it is time for hunting 

春冬片設而 TOKI KATAMAKETE and we wear our down robes 

幸之 IDEMASIsi on the great plain of Uda 

宇陀乃大野者 uda no OPONWO PA where we have gone out 

所念武鴨 OMOPOYEmu KAMO I will likely be reminded of you. 

In documents preserved in Shōsōin we find names like 小野朝臣遠倍 
WONWO ASOMI Wonibe, and 遠敷郡 Wonipu District. There are also wooden 
tablets excavated from Nara with the toponym 若狭国遠敷郡 WAKAsa 
Province Wonipu District, one dated 750 (MK 1950). The cursive form of this 
phonogram yields hiragana を. 

 

怨 


OJ: wo OC: *ʔons 

LH: ʔyanh EMC: ʔjwɐn GO: womu KN: wen 

NOM: oán SV: oan, oán SK: wen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears twice in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 819 

余能奈可波 yo no naka pa How bothersome is longing 

古飛斯宜志恵夜 kwopwi sigesiweya in the world. 

加久之阿良婆 kakusi araba If this is how things are 

烏梅能波奈尓母 ume no pana nimo I wish I could have been 

奈良麻之勿能怨 naramasi mono wo a plum blossom instead. 

 

爲 


OJ: wo OC: *wai 

LH: wai EMC: jwe GO: wi KN: wi 

NOM: ví, vì, vị, vơ, vờ SV: vi, vị SK: wuy 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This usage is quite peculiar, as the 
phonology does not match well, but there are five examples of this phonogram in 
Man’yōshū, all representing the second mora of the verb woworu ‘to bend under 
the weight of something.’ This graph appears to have been corrupted during 
scribal transmission, changing from 爲 > 為 > 烏. 

MYS 1752 

射行相乃 IYUKIAPI no How I desire a maiden 

坂之踏本尓 SAKA NO PUMOTO ni who would show me 

開乎爲流 SAKIwoworu the blooming cherry blossoms 


櫻花乎 SAKURA NO PANA wo so full they bend the branches 

令見兒毛欲得 MISEMU KWO moGAMO at the foot of Iyukiai Hill. 

 

弘 


OJ: wo OC: *ɡwə̂ ŋ 

LH: ɣuəŋ EMC: ɣwəŋ LMC: xɦuəŋ GO: gu KO: kou 

NOM: NA SV: hoằng SK: hwoyng 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It only appears in Nihon shoki. The most 
well known usage is in the name of Great King Kenzō, whose name is 弘計 
Wokye. This phonogram also appears five times in poetry: 

NSK 66 

佐瑳羅餓多 sasaragata Undo the string with 

邇之枳能臂毛弘 nisiki no pimwo wo the bamboo whisk design— 

等枳舍氣帝 tokisakete that brocade string. 

阿麻多絆泥受迩 amata pa nezu ni I cannot spend many nights; 

多儾比等用能未 tada pitoywo nomwi let us spend but one night. 

 

雍 


OJ: wo OC: *ʔoŋ 

LH: ʔuoŋ EMC: ʔjwoŋ GO: wou KN: you 

NOM: úng, ủun SV: ung SK: wong 

Usage / History: 

This usage belongs to the LJS, and appears in the Shoku Nihongi, in the name 
雍良岑 Wora Peak (721.10.13). 

 

越 


OJ: wo, woti, woto OC: *wat 

LH: wat EMC: jwɐt GO: woti KN: wetu 

NOM: việt, vượt SV: việt SK: wel, hwal 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It can transcribe wo as well as woti and 
woto. This phonogram appears in Nihon shoki to transcribe the toponym 越智 
Woti (NSG), and it is plausible that this continues an older tradition of using a 
geminate to signify the preceding vowel is short: wotti. The place name 越智 
Woti also appears in Man’yōshū; but the anthology preserves a variety of usages 
of this phonogram: 泊瀬越女 PATUSE WotoMYE ‘the maiden of Hatsuse’ (MYS 
424), though in another poem we find 越等賣良波 wotomyera pa ‘as for the 
maidens...’ (MYS 865); there are even times when the phonogram appears alone 
and the reading has to be inferred: 越能菅原 Woti no SUGAPARA ‘the field of 
rushes in Ochi’ (MYS 1341). An example where the phonogram is used to 
transcribe wo appears below. 

MYS 848 

久毛尓得夫 kumwo ni tobu Rather than consuming the potion 

久須利波牟用波 kusuri pamu ywo pa ‘Flying through the clouds’ 

美也古弥婆 kiyakwo miba if I could see the capital 

伊夜之吉阿何微 iyasiki a ga mwi then this decrepit body of mine 

麻多越知奴倍之 mata wotinu besi would be young again. 

An example where it is used for woti is below. 


MYS 194 

玉垂乃 TAMADARE no On the great plains of Ochi 

越能大野之 woti no OPONWO NO where the jewels hang down, 

旦露尓 ASA TUYU ni your jeweled skirts drenched 

玉裳者埿打 TAMAMO PA PIDUTI with the morning dew, 

夕霧尓 YUPUGWIRI ni and your robes soaked 

衣者沾而 KOROMO PA NURETE with the evening mists 

草枕 KUSA MAKURA you make a grass pillow 

旅宿鴨為留 TABINE KAMO SUru to sleep outdoors, because you 

不相君故 APANU KIMI YUWE will not meet your lord. 

 

嗚 


OJ: wo OC: *ʔâ 

LH: ʔa EMC: ʔuo LMC: ʔuə GO: u KO: wo 

NOM: ô SV: ô SK: wo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears only in Nihon shoki. It is 
perhaps well known for representing the name of Susanowo: 素戔嗚尊 (NSG). 
This phonogram also appears twice in annotational notes and 16 times in poetry: 
雄誥、此云嗚多稽眉 “ ‘ferocity’ is read wotakyebwi” (NSG). 

NSK 96 

野絁磨倶儞 yasima kuni I searched the eight islands 

都磨々祁哿泥底 tuma makikanete but could not find a spouse. 

播屢比能 parupi no Under the spring sun 

哿須我能倶儞々 kasuga no kuni ni in the land of Kasuga 

倶波絁謎嗚 kupasi mye wo I had heard that 

阿利等枳々底 ari to kikite there was a beautiful maiden. 

與慮志謎嗚 yorosi mye wo I had heart that 

阿利等枳々底 ari to kikite there was a proper woman. 

莽紀佐倶 makwi saku A fine grain of wood, 

避能伊陀圖嗚 pi no itatwo wo I pushed opened that door 

飫斯毘羅枳 osipiraki made of Japanese cypress. 

倭例以梨魔志 ware irimasi I went inside 

阿都圖唎 atwo twori and held her leg, 

都麼怒唎絁底 tumadworisite holding the edge of her hem, 

魔倶囉圖唎 makura twori holding her pillow— 

伊慕我堤嗚 imo ga te wo holding my spouse. 

倭例儞魔柯斯毎 ware ni makasime I wrapped her hand 

倭我堤嗚麼 wa ga te woba around my waist 

伊慕儞魔柯絁毎 imo ni makasime and she my arm— 

麼左棄逗囉 masakwidura wrapped it around her. 

多々企阿藏播梨 tataki azapari And like a vine, 

矢洎矩矢慮 sisikusiro we caressed, intertwined. 

于魔伊禰矢度儞 umai nesi two ni We slept deeply, 

儞播都等唎 nipatu tori sweet like meat on a skewer. 

柯稽播儺倶儺梨 kakye pa nakunari The fowl I keep 

奴都等利 nwotu tori have begun to cackle. 


枳蟻矢播等余武 kigisi pa toyomu And in the fields 

婆絁稽矩謨 pasikyeku mo the pheasants add their call. 

伊麻娜以播孺底 imada ipazute The dawn has already come 

阿開儞啓梨 akenikyeri before I have been able 

倭蟻慕 wagimo to confess my feelings, my love. 

 

汚 


OJ: wo OC: *ʔwâ 

LH: ʔua EMC: ʔɔ LMC: ʔuə GO: u KO: wo 

NOM: ô, ố SV: ô, ố SK: wo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This graph is almost always written as 
汙. As noted under this graph read as u, this is primarily used to transcribe u, but 
as Ōno (1962:115) points out, there are a number of examples in the Mino 
Census of 702 where it seems quite certain that this usage is transcribing wo, 
which the Sino-Xenic data support. Examples from the Mino Census include 汙 
手賣 WoTEmye, 汙奈賣 Wonamye, 汙麻呂 Womaro, 汙志賣 Wosimye, 
and 汙屋賣 WoYAmye. 

 

惋 


OJ: wo OC: *ʔônʔ 

LH: ʔuanʔ EMC: ʔwânʔ LMC: ʔyan GO: won KN: wan 

NOM: NA SV: uyển SK: wan 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. This rare usage appears once in Nihon 
shoki in a poem. 

NSK 71 

阿摩儾霧 amadamu Flying in the sky 

箇留惋等賣 karu wotomye Princess Karu, 

異哆儺介麼 ita nakaba people will notice 

臂等資利奴陪瀰 pito sirinu bemi if I cry uncontrollably. 

幡舍能夜摩能 pasa no yama no I will be like the dove 

波刀能 patwo no of Mount Hasa 

資哆儺企迩奈勾 sita naki ni naku who coos in a soft voice. 

 

小 


OJ: wo OC: *siauʔ 

LH: siauʔ EMC: sjäuʔ GO: seu KN: seu 

NOM: tiểu, tĩu SV: tiểu SK: swo 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ wo ‘small.’ Because it has only three 
strokes, this kungana gained popularity rather early on. This usage appears in 
Nihon shoki: 小倉 WOKURA (NSG), and 小橋 WOBASI (NSG). There are 
also many examples in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 1214 

安太部去 ada PYE YUKU Even the leaves of 

小為手乃山之 WOSUTE no YAMA NO the Podocarp tree on Mount Osute 

真木葉毛 MAKWI NO PA mo on the road toward Ada, 

久不見者 PISASIKU MINEBA which I have not see for a long time, 

蘿生尓家里. KOKE MUSInikyeri have become covered with moss. 


尾 


OJ: wo OC: *məiʔ 

LH: muiʔ EMC: mjweiʔ GO: mi KB: bi 

NOM: vĩ, vã, vải SV: vĩ SK: mi 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ wo ‘tail.’ In Kojiki there are names such as 天 
之尾羽張 AMA NO WOPAPARI (KG), and 白梼尾 KASINOWO (KG). On 
wooden tablets excavated from the old Fujiwara Palace ruins (fl. 694–710) we 
find names like 語部君尾勝 KATARIBYE KIMI WOKATU (MKK 11:32). 

Nihon shoki also preserves a number of examples of this graph, primarily in 
names and toponyms: 三尾 MIWO (NSG) and 物部大連尾輿 MONONOBYE 
OPOMURAZI WOKOSI (NSG). This kungana is quite popular in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 750 

念絶 OMOPITAYE Having given up 

和備西物尾 wabwiNISI MONO WO and languishing in despair, 

中々荷 NAKA NAKA NI then half-heartedly 

奈何辛苦 NANI ka KURUSIKU I started seeing you again, 

相見始兼 APIMISOMEkyemu somewhat painfully. 

 

少 


OJ: wo OC: *hjau or *hjauh 

LH: śauʔ, śauh EMC: śjäuʔ, śjäuh GO: seu KN: seu 

NOM: thiếu, thỉu, thểu SV: thiểu, thiếu SK: swo 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ wo ‘small (in number).’ This usage 
appears in Nihon shoki: 少郊 WONWO (NSG), and 少麻呂 WOmaro 
(NSG). Regarding 少郊 WONWO above, while NKBT has this as 小郊, it 
seems clear that there are more manuscripts with 少 than 小, though I admit 
deciding which is original is difficult. 

There are a few examples of this usage in Man’yōshū. There is the name 日 
置少老 PEKI [NO] WO-OYU (MYS 354), 紀少鹿女郎 Kwi [NO] WOSIKA 
[NO] IRATUMYE (MYS 1648). 

 

麻 


OJ: wo OC: *mrâi 

LH: mai > ma EMC: ma GO: ma KN: ma 

NOM: ma SV: ma SK: ma 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ wo ‘hemp.’ There is only one 
example in Kojiki: 麻組郎女 WOKUMI [NO] IRATUMYE (KG). Only one name 
is written with this graph in Nihon shoki: 麻績 WOMI (NSG). There are five 
examples of this graph transcribing wo in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2172 

吾屋戸之 A GA YADWO NO My beloved, put out your hand 

麻花押靡 WOBANA OSINABE and touch the miscanthus 

置露尓 OKU TUYU ni in my yard that bends 

手觸吾妹兒 TE PURE WAGIMOKWO under the weight of the dew; 

落巻毛将見 OTIMAKU mo MIMU let us watch it fall. 

 


男 


OJ: wo OC: *nə̂ m 

LH: nəm EMC: nậm GO: namu KN: damu 

NOM: nam SV: nam SK: nam 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ wo ‘male.’ There is a tradition that 
the earliest example of this kungana appears on the Suda Hachiman mirror 
inscription (ca. 500) where we find 大王年男弟王, which sometimes is 
interpreted as ‘In the time of the Great King, King WO-OTO....’ However, this is 
the sole evidence for a kungana this far back in time, and I think David Lurie 
(2001:163–164) is right to interpret this as simply ‘the younger brother, the prince.’ 

This means that some of the earliest examples come from wooden documents 
dug up from the site of the ancient Fujiwara Palace (fl. 694–710) where we find a 
name 八田部忍男 YATABYE OSIWO (MK 2025). This semantogram appears 
in Kojiki, in names like 天之忍男 AME NO OSIWO (KG), 火之夜藝速男神 
the deity PWI NO YAGIPAYAWO (KG), and 石 筒 之男神 the deity 
IPATUTNOWO (KG). Related names appear also in Nihon shoki: 磐筒男命 
IPATUTUNOWO [NO] MIKOTO (NSG), 男大迹天皇 Great King WOPODO 
(NSG), and 許勢男人 Kose WOPITO (NSG). 

This usage also appears in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 13 

高山波 KAGUYAMA pa Mount Kagu fought 

雲根火雄男志等 unebwi WO WOsi to with Mount Unebi 

耳梨與 MIMINASI TO afraid to lose his spouse, 

相諍競伎 APIARASWOPIKI Mount Miminashi. 

神代従 KAMWIYO YWORI It appears that it has been 

如此尓有良之 KAKU ni ARUrasi thus since the Age of the Gods. 

 

雄 


OJ: wo OC: *wəŋ 

LH: wuŋ EMC: juŋ GO: wou KN: yuu 

NOM: hùng SV: hùng SK: wung 

Usage / History: 

This kungana, like 男 above, suggests to the reader OJ wo ‘male.’ This 
usage appears in Nihon shoki, in examples like 難波吉士雄成 Nanipa Kisi 
WONARI (NSG), 境部臣雄摩侶 SAKAPIBYE OMI WOmaro (NSG), and 蘇我 
倉麻呂、更名雄當 Swoga KURAmaro, also known as WOMASA (NSG). 

This usage also appears in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 436 

人言之 PITOGOTO NO These days when rumors 

繁比日 SIGEKI KONO PI from people are bothersome— 

玉有者 TAMA NARABA if you were a jewel then I would 

手尓巻持而 TE ni MAKI MOTITE wrap you around my wrist and 

不戀有益雄 KWOPWIZARAMASI WO I would not have to yearn for you. 

 

緒 


OJ: wo OC: *s-laʔ 

LH: ziaʔ EMC: zjwoʔ GO: zio KN: sio 

NOM: NA SV: tự SK: sye 


Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ wo ‘thread, string.’ This usage 
appears in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 321 

布士能嶺乎 puzi no NE wo In awe of the highness 

高見恐見 TAKAMI KASIKWOMI of the peak of Mount Fuji 

天雲毛 AMAKUMWO mo even the heavenly clouds 

伊去羽斤 iYUKI PABAKARI are spreading out, 

田菜引物緒 TANABIKU MONO WO unable to continue on. 

This usage also appears in Izumo fudoki in the name 日置部根緒 PIOKIBYE 
NEWO. It is also see in Hizen fudoki in the name 健緒組 TAKEWOGUMI. 

 

綬 


OJ: wo OC: *duh 

LH: dźuh EMC: dźjəuh GO: ziu KN: siu 

NOM: NA SV: thụ SK: sywu 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ wo ‘string.’ This usage only appears 
in Man’yōshū, and then only once. 

MYS 2918 

大方者 OPOKATA PA Why should I be so smitten 

何鴨将戀 NANI KAMO KWOPWIMU if this were ordinary? 

言擧不為 KOTOAGE SEZU Even if I do not declare it 

妹尓依宿牟 IMWO ni YORI NEmu the time when I can be near and 

年者近綬 TOSI PA TIKAKI WO sleep with my beloved is close. 

 

峽 


OJ: wo OC: *ɡrêp 

LH: ɡɛp EMC: ɣiep GO: gefu KN: kafu 

NOM: giáp SV: hiệp SK: hyep 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ wo ‘peak.’ This usage is only found in Nihon 
shoki in the following place names: 曲􀀀宮 the MAGARIWO Palace (NSG), 
豐前國長􀀀縣 TOYO [NO] KUNI [NO] MITI [NO] KUTI [NO] KUNI [NO] NAGAWO 
[NO] AGATA ‘Nagao District of the Buzen Province’ (NSG), and 柏􀀀 
KASIPAWO (NSG). 

 

𠮧 


OJ: wo OC: *kiûh 

LH: keuh EMC: kieuh GO: keu KN:keu 

NOM: khiếu, kêu SV: khiếu SK: kywo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram appears to be a vulgar version of the character 叫 ‘shout’ 
(叫 > 叫 > 𠮧). As Ōno (1962:123) points out, this kungana suggests to the 
mind OJ wo which is a shout or exclamation. There are 22 examples in 
Man’yōshū, which is the only text that preserves this usage. Every example of 
this graph represents the accusative (or direct object) particle wo. 


MYS 1405 

蜻野𠮧 AKIDUNWO WO As people mentioned 

人之懸者 PITO NO KAKUREBA the moor of Akizu, 

朝蒔 ASA MAKISI I thought of you 

君之所思而 KIMI GA OMOPOYETE whose ashes I spread this morning 

嗟齒不病 NAGEKI PA YAMAZU and my laments cease not. 

 

 


Y 

 

 

邪 



OJ: ya OC: *la or *ja 

LH: ja EMC: jia GO: zia KN: sia 

NOM: tà SV: tà SK: ya 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. As I have already argued (2008:7) it is 
very likely that the Historiographical Office of the Wei replaced a semantically 
more neutral graph, such as 耶 LH ja with 邪. Because 耶 does not have the 
z- initial reading, it is more likely that 邪 was selected to transcribe ya. This 
graph represents the name of the queen’s capital city in Wei zhi: 邪馬台 *yama-
tə. It also renders toponyms such as 伊邪 *i-ya and 邪馬 *ya-ma. This 
phonogram also appears in several toponyms on the peninsula as preserved in 
Wei zhi: 不斯濆 邪 國 *pu-se-bun-ya domain, 彌烏 邪馬國 *me-ɔ-ya-ma 
domain, 狗邪國 *kɔ-ya domain, and 安邪國 *an-ya domain. 

This phonogram is used by the Kojiki compiler to transcribe za (which see). 
As this phonogram means ‘wickedness,’ it was generally avoided in Japanese 
transcriptions. See 耶 below. 

 

益 


OJ: ya, yaku OC: *ʔek 

LH: ʔiek EMC: ʔjiäk GO: yaku KN: eki 

NOM: ích,ịch SV: ích SK: ik 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in one name in the record of 
Tenmu in Nihon shoki: 韓奈末金利益 Komu Riyak of the 10th rank. 

This graph appears in Nihon shoki: 巨勢朝臣多益須 Kose [NO] ASOMI 
Tayasu, and 益須郡 Yasu District (of Afumi Province). It also appears in 
Man’yōshū in toponyms like 讃岐國安益郡 Aya District in Sanuki Province. 
Shoku Nihongi preserves names like 巨勢朝臣太益須 Kose ASOMI Tayasu 
(706.7.11), whose name also appears later as 巨勢朝臣多益首 Kose ASOMI 
Tayasu (708.3.13), and 佐益郡 Saya District (722.2.16). 

There are a variety of cases where the -k- is retained, or is used to show a 
velar geminate: 益氣王 Prince Yake (Shoku Nihongi, 713.4.23), 上高益信 
Ziyau-kau Yakusinu (724.5.13), 益救 郡 Yaku Distrcit (Shoku Nihongi, 
733.6.2), and 益久嶋 Yaku Island (754.1.17), and 益頭郡 Yakidu (Yakudu?) 
District (757.8.13). 

 

移 


OJ: ya OC: *lai 

LH: jai > je EMC: jie GO: i KN: i 

NOM: di, day, dời, giay, rơi SV: di, ri, gi SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears in quotes in Nihon shoki from 
Paekche material. In the Jingū record there appears a Paekche man named 爾波 
移 Nipaya. It is interesting that in the Atsuta manuscript there is a marginal note 


to the side of this name: 私記、移音野 ‘Shiki notes that the phonogram 移 is 
to be read as 野 ya.’ Then in the seventh year of Keitai, a Japanese official 
named 穗積臣押山 PODUMI [NO] OMI OSIYAMA is mentioned in Paekche 
pongi as 委意斯移麻岐彌 Osiyama Kimi of Wa (委). Finally in the sixth year 
of Kinmei, when the king of Paekche presents a Buddhist statue to the Yamato 
court, the compilers note 以此功徳、願天皇獲勝善之徳、天皇所用、彌移居 
國、倶蒙福祐 ‘With this merit (of making a Buddhist statue) we pray that the 
Divine Ruler will obtain excellent virtue, and that the land of the miyake (彌移居 
國) under his jurisdiction will be blessed.’ It is very possible that the Shoki 
compilers have adjusted parts of this missive, like changing 倭王 to 天皇, but 
the rendition 彌移居國 attests to the fact that the original content of the missive 
was not seriously altered. 

There are a number of examples of 移 transcribing ya in the earliest extant 
corpus of Japan. In the no longer extant ‘Gangōji roban inscription’ we find 
Prince Shōtoku Taishi’s name written as 有 麻移刀 等 已 彌 彌 乃 彌 己 等 
Umayatwo Toyomimi no Mikoto and Empress Suiko’s name is preserved as 等 
已彌居加斯支移比彌乃彌己等 Toyo Mike Kasikiya Pimye no Mikoto. There 
are also a few examples still preserved in people’s names in the Mino Census of 
702: 移乎賣 Yawomye, 志賣移賣 Simyeyamye, 彌移賣 Miyamye, and 移 
和 Yawa. There is also an interesting mokkan excavated from the Ōtsu dig with 
this information: 誣阿佐ム加ム移母 “ ‘falsely accuse’ is glossed asamukamu ya mo 
‘could (someone/thing) deceive us?’ ” (MKK 33:145). 

There is one example of this orthographic tradition preserved in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 812 

許等騰波奴 koto topanu Though a piece of wood does not 

紀尓茂安理等毛 kwi nimo ari tomo utter words, would I ever lay it 

和何世古我 wa ga sekwo ga on the ground, that favorite 

多那礼乃美巨騰 tanare no mikoto august koto belonging 

都地尓意加米移母 tuti ni okame ya mo to my beloved elder? 

 

耶 


OJ: ya OC: *la or *ja 

LH: ja EMC: jia GO: ya KN: ya 

NOM: NA SV: da, ra SK: ya 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It appears on the Kwangkaytho stele: 
古模耶羅城 *kɔ-mo-ya-la fortress, and 古家耶羅城 *kɔ-ka-ya-la fortress. It 
appears once in the record of Kinmei in the name of a man from Koguryŏ, 高麗 
人頭霧唎耶陛 ‘Tumuriyapye, a man from Kwoma.’ 

The Yōrō Census of 721 contains a few names with this graph: 阿耶賣 
Ayamye and 古阿耶賣 Kwoayamye. This phonogram appears on one mokkan 
dated 745: 凡海阿耶男 OPOSIAMA AyaWO (MK 327). 

This phonogram is also used in Nihon shoki, in six annotational notes, and 15 
times in poetry: 日本、此云耶麻騰 “ ‘Japan’ this is read yamato” (NSG). 

NSK 91 

於彌能姑能 omi no kwo no The son of the Omi has 

耶賦能之魔柯枳 yapu no sibagaki made a fine brushwood fence. 

始陀騰余瀰 sitatoyomi But if the earth quakes 


那爲我與釐據魔 nawi ga yorikoba that brushwood fence 

耶黎夢之魔柯枳 yaremu sibagaki will likely fall to pieces. 

This phonogram appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 818 

波流佐礼婆 paru sareba When it is spring 

麻豆佐久耶登能 madu saku yado no will I spend the spring days 

烏梅能波奈 ume no pana gazing alone at 

比等利美都々夜 pitori mitutu ya the plum blossoms 

波流比久良佐武 parupi kurasamu that bloom first in my garden? 

 

夜 


OJ: ya OC: *jah < *jakh 

LH: jah EMC: jiah GO: ya KN: ya 

NOM: dạ SV: dạ, rạ SK: ya, iok 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It appears in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu, 
in a very old rendition of the name of Great Queen Suiko: 止余美気加志支夜比 
売天皇 Great King Toyo Mikekasikiya Pimye. It also appears in a poem 
composed by Kose Mitsue after the death of the prince: 

美加弥乎須 mikami wosu Mount Tabasami 

多婆佐美夜麻乃 tabasami yama no that rules from above; 

阿遅加気尓 adikake ni alas, I stood there 

比止乃麻乎之志 pito no mawosisi in the shade of the aji, 

和何於保支美波母 wa ga opokimi pamo begging our master’s return. 

This phonogram appears eight times in the liturgies: 王等卿等乎母平久天 
皇我朝廷爾伊加志夜久波叡能如久仕奉利 OPOKIMITATI MAPYETU KIMITATI wo 
mo TAPIRAKEku SUMYERA ga MIKADWO ni ikasiyaku paye no GOTOku 
TUKAPEMATUri “We pray that the princes and ministers also will be at peace, and 
that they may serve the throne as the plants grow thickly…” (NT 2). This 
phonogram is popular in the orthography found on mokkan: 丸部伊夜売 
WaniBYE Iyamye (unnumbered tablet), 之比等等々流刀毛意夜志己々呂曽 
sipito to toru twomo iyasi kokoro so ‘Even if I take my father-in-law, such base 
feelings…’ (MK 174). 

This is the principal phonogram found in Kojiki: 妹阿夜上訶志古泥神 ‘a 
younger sister, the deity Aya Kasikwone’ (KG), 阿那迩夜志愛上袁登古袁 ana 
ni ya si e wotokwo wo ‘Ah, what a wonderful male’ (KG), and 波迩夜須毘古神 
‘the deity Paniyasubikwo’ (KG). 

KK 40 

許能美岐袁 kono miki wo The person who 

迦美祁牟比登波 kamikyemu pito pa brewed this august wine— 

曾能都豆美 sono tudumi did he brew it 

宇須迩多弖弖 udu ni tatete while singing, 

宇多比都都 utapitutu standing his drum 

迦美祁禮迦母 kamikyeru kamo as if it were a mortar? 

麻比都都 mapitutu Did he brew it 

迦美祁禮加母 kamikyeru kamo while he danced? 

許能美岐能 kono miki no This august wine 

美岐能 miki no august wine, 


阿夜迩宇多陀怒斯 aya ni utadanwosi how delightful it is. 

佐佐 sa sa Drink! Drink! 

This phonogram is the principal graph used in Nihon shoki, appearing in six 
annotational notes, and 45 times in the poetry: 妍哉、此云阿那而惠夜 “ ‘how 
beautiful’ is read ana ni we ya” (NSG). 

NSK 1 

夜句茂多兔 yakumo tatu Endowed with power, 

伊弩毛夜覇餓岐 idumwo yapyegaki this two-fold Izumo fence— 

兔磨語味爾 tuma gome ni to conceal ourselves, 

夜覇餓枳都倶盧 yapyegaki tukuru I have built this two-fold fence. 

贈廼夜覇餓岐廻 sono yapyegaki we Yes, within this two-fold fence! 

This phonogram also appears in the Bussoku stone poems: 

BSS 2 

弥蘇知阿麻利 miswoti amari The person who is complete 

布多都乃加多知 putatu no katati with the thirty-two marks 

夜蘇久佐等 yaswokusa to and the eighty types of merits 

曾太礼留比止乃 sodareru pito no at the place where the footprints 

布美志阿止々己呂 pumisi ato tokoro have been trod— 

麻礼尓母阿留可毛 mare nimo aru kamo how rare these are! 

This is the principal phonogram in Man’yōshū, appearing some 543 times in 
the anthology. 

MYS 3618 

夜麻河伯能 yamagapa no Though we enjoy ourselves 

伎欲吉可波世尓 kiywoki kapase ni by the pristine shoals 

安蘇倍杼母 aswobedomo of the mountain river, 

奈良能美夜故波 nara no miyakwo pa I cannot forget 

和須礼可祢都母 wasurekanetu mo the capital in Nara. 

 

也 


OJ: ya OC: *laʔ 

LH: jaʔ EMC: jiaʔ GO: ya KN: ya 

NOM: rã, rả, giã SV: rã SK: ya 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in the Mino Census of 702 in 
names like 也里都賣 Yaritumye, 也利賣 Yarimye, 止也麻呂 Toya Maro, 
and 也曾麻呂 Yaso Maro. This phonogram is the second most popular graph to 
transcribe ya in Man’yōshū, after 夜, appearing 146 times. 

MYS 243 

王者 OPOKIMI PA Our great lord 

千歳二麻佐武 TITOSE ni masamu will exist for a thousand years. 

白雲毛 SIRAKUMWO mo Will there ever come a day 

三船乃山尓 MIPUNE no YAMA ni when the white clouds on 

絶日安良米也 TAYURU PI arame ya Mount Mifune disappear? 

 

楊 


OJ: ya OC: *laŋ 

LH: jaŋ EMC: jiaŋ GO: yau KN: yau 

NOM: dàng, thang SV: dương SK: yang 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in the name 楊貴氏 
Yakwi, which is found on a stone epitaph dated to the 11th year of Tenpyō (739). 
It also appears on a tablet excavated from a dig in North Takagi in Toyama 
Prefecture: 安万呂楊麻呂呂楊楊万呂楊万呂, where someone was practicing 
writing names: YASUmaro, Yamaro-ro ya Yamaro Yamaro (MKK 17:135). 

This phonogram also appears in a Silla name recorded in Shoku Nihongi 韓 
奈麻昔楊節 Ziaku Yausetu of the 10th rank (723.8.8). 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū, where it is used both for its 
phonological and semantic value: 楊 is a poplar tree. 

MYS 840 

波流楊那宜 paru yanagwi The spring willow— 

可豆良尓乎利志 kadura ni worisi the plum blossom I broke off 

烏梅能波奈 ume no pana to decorate my hair, 

多礼可有可倍志 tare ka ukabesi who has let it float 

佐加豆岐能倍尓 sakaduki no pe ni inside my wine cup? 

 

陽 


OJ: ya OC: *laŋ 

LH: jaŋ EMC: jiaŋ GO: yau KN: yau 

NOM: dương SV: dương, cang, giang SK: yang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and it appears that this usage was 
influenced by Chinese immigrants. This phonogram appears in documents 
preserved in Shōsōin, in names such as 陽候 Yakwo or 陽胡 Yakwo, or 陽枳 
Yaki. 

This phonogram appears in Nihon shoki in the names 陽胡史 Yakwo [NO] 
PUBITO (NSG), and 上陽咩郡 Upper Yamye District (NSG). It should be noted 
that Ōno (1977:817) writes that 陽胡 appears in the record of Sujin, but it 
actually appears in the 10th year of Suiko. 

This phonogram also appears in Man’yōshū in the poet’s name 麻田連陽春 
ASADA [NO] MURAZI Yasu (MYS 569–570). 

 

揚 


OJ: ya OC: *laŋ 

LH: jaŋ EMC: jiaŋ GO: yau KN: yau 

NOM: đàng, đang SV: dương SK: yang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in the name 揚胡 Yakwo 
as found in a document in the Shōsōin. 

 

野 


OJ: ya OC: *laʔ 

LH: jaʔ EMC: jiaʔ GO: ya KN: ya 

NOM: dã SV: dã, rạ SK: ya 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It is seldom used to transcribe ya 
because it was more popular as a semantogram for nwo ‘field.’ It appears once in 
Nihon shoki: 筑紫君薩野馬 Tukusi KIMI Sarayama. This phonogram appears 
twice in one poem in Man’yōshū. 


MYS 804 

等伎能佐迦利乎 toki no sakari wo Unable to hang on to 

等々尾迦禰 todomwikane the best of those times 

周具斯野利都礼 sugusiyariture time has marched on. 

美奈乃和多 mina no wata Upon this black hair, 

迦具漏伎可美尓 kagurwoki kami ni black as the guts of the snail, 

伊都乃麻可 itu no ma ka frost has lighted 

斯毛乃布利家武 simwo no purikyemu without my knowing it. 

 

椰 


OJ: ya OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: jia GO: ya KN: ya 

NOM: da, dà, dừa SV: da SK: ya 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, but it is confined to Nihon shoki. It 
appears in one annotational note, and 31 times in poetry: 饒速日、此云儞藝波 
椰卑 “ ‘The deity Nigi Hayahi’ is read nigi payapi” (NSG). 

NSK 12 

哆々奈梅弖 tatanamete With our shields arrayed 

伊那瑳能椰摩能 inasa no yama no we have fought many battles 

虚能莽由毛 ko no mayu mo on Mount Inasa, 

易喩耆摩毛羅毘 iyuki mamworapi going through the trees 

多々介陪麼 tatakapeba and watching the enemy. 

和例破椰隈怒 ware pa ya wenu Thus are we famished. 

之摩途等利 simatutori Birds of the island— 

宇介譬餓等茂 ukapi ga tomo come now to our rescue, 

伊莽輸開珥虚禰 ima suke ni kone you friends of the cormorants. 

 

揶 


OJ: ya OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: jia GO: ya KN: ya 

NOM: NA SV: da SK: ya 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only in Nihon shoki. This 
graph appears in three annotational notes and 13 times in the poetry in Nihon 
shoki: 泳宮、此云區玖利能彌揶 “ ‘Kukuri Palace’ is read kukuri no miya” 
(NSG). 

NSK 54 

菟藝泥赴 tuginepu Taking my journey 

揶莽之呂餓波鳥 yamasirogapa wo up the Yamashiro River, 

瀰揶能朋利 miya nopori where trees grow thick, 

和餓能朋例麼 wa ga noporeba I journeyed past the palace. 

阿烏珥豫辭 awo ni yosi I traveled beyond 

儺羅烏輸疑 nara wo sugwi the blue hills of Nara. 

烏陀氐 wodate I headed beond 

夜莽苔烏輸疑 yamato wo sugwi the aegis peaks of Yamato. 

和餓瀰餓朋辭區珥波 wa ga migaposi kuni pa The land I longed to behold was 

箇豆羅紀多伽瀰揶 kadurakwi takamiya the high palace in Kazuraki— 

和藝幣能阿多利 wagipye no atari everything around my home. 


瑘 


OJ: ya OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: jia GO: ya KN: ya 

NOM: NA SV: da SK: ya 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS and appears once in an annotational note 
in Nihon shoki: 言屋、此云伊浮瑘 “ ‘Ifuya Shrine’ is read ipuya” (NSG). 

 

掖 


OJ: ya OC: *jak 

LH: jak EMC: jiäk GO: yaku KN: eki 

NOM: dịch SV: rịch SK: oik 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in Nihon shoki, but only to 
write the name of an island: 掖玖 Yaku. Again, it is important to notice the 
geminate here (yakku) which likely signifies a short vowel in the first syllable. 

 

養 


OJ: ya OC: *jaŋʔ 

LH: jaŋʔ EMC: jiaŋʔ LMC: jiaŋ GO: yau KN: yau 

NOM: dưỡng SV: dưỡng, dượng SK: yang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears in rather innovative 
spellings. In a document preserved in Shōsōin we find 養徳 which apparently 
represents Yamato, with the assumption that the velar nasal of yang was 
interpreted as an -m- (cf. Ōno 1977:126). Interestingly this same usage appears 
on five different mokkan excavated from the Nara ruins (MK 78, 91, 144, 12118, 
MKK 12:138). This phonogram also appears in Hizen fudoki in the toponym 養 
父 Yabu < *yanpu. 

 

屋 


OJ: ya OC: *ʔôk 

LH: ʔok EMC: ʔuk GO: woku KN: woku 

NOM: ọc SV: ốc SK: wok 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ ya ‘roof.’ This usage is very old, and 
appears in the oldest extant records. In the genealogy of Jōgū Shōtoku hōō 
teisetsu the following name is preserved: 物部室屋 MONONOBYE MURWOYA. 
This name may actually be a mistake for 守屋 MORIYA, but the texts agree on 
MURWOYA. This appears on several mokkan: 伊勢国安濃郡長屋郷 Ise 
Province Anwo District NAGAYA Village (MKK 3:12), 高屋佐美 TAKAYA 
Sami (unnumbered tablet). 

This usage appears in Kojiki in a number of names: 天兩屋嶋 the island 
AME PUTAYA (KG), 大屋毘古神 the deity OPOYAbikwo (KG), 鹿屋野比賣 
神 the deity KAYANWO Pimye (KG). This phonogram is used over 100 times 
in Nihon shoki, as the following few examples illustrate: 吾屋惶根尊 AYA 
KASIKONE [NO] MIKOTO (NSG), 吾屋橿城尊 AYA KASIKWI [NO] MIKOTO 
(NSG), 大屋津姫命 OPOYATU PIMYE [NO] MIKOTO (NSG), and 長屋 the 
place name NAGAYA (NSG). 

This semantogram is also quite prevalent in Man’yōshū. 


MYS 7 

金野乃 AKI NO NWO no I recall that temporary hut 

美草苅葺 miKUSA KARIPUKI where we spent one night 

屋杼礼里之 YAdorerisi in the capital at Uji 

兎道乃宮子能 uDI no MIYAKWO no which was thatched with grass 

借五百礒所念 KARI IPO SI OMOPOYU from the golden fields. 

 

八 


OJ: ya OC: *prêt 

LH: pɛt EMC: păt GO: fati KN: fatu 

NOM: bát SV: bát SK: phal 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ ya ‘eight.’ This usage is also used fairly early. 
In the Mino Census of 702 the following names include this graph: 八十麻呂 
YASWO Maro, 八嶋賣 YASIMAmye, and 八知波 YAtipa. 

There are also a number of examples of this kungana in Kojiki: 日子八井命 
PIKWO YAWI [NO] MIKOTO (KG). 

As this represents a number, in the mythology many of these same names are 
used in Nihon shoki. This kungana is also popular in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 21 

紫草能 MURASAKI no Like the purple grass 

尓保敝類妹乎 nipopyeru IMWO wo if I were to think evil of 

尓苦久有者 nikuku ARABA my blushing beloved, 

人嬬故尓 PITODUMA YUWE ni would I also yearn for 

吾戀目八方 ARE KWOPWIME YAMO another’s spouse like this? 

 

矢 


OJ: ya OC: *lhiʔ 

LH: śiʔ EMC: śiʔ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: thỉ, thẻ SV: thỉ SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ ya ‘arrow.’ The earliest datable example 
appears in the Mino Census of 702: 矢田 部 YATABYE, and 寸矢賣 
KIYAmye. This phonogram is also found in Kojiki in two names: 倭飛羽矢若 
屋 比 賣 YAMATO TOBIPAYA WAKAYA Pimye and 宮 主矢河 枝 比 賣 
MIYANUSI YAKAPAYE Pimye. This phonogram appears on a number of 
excavated tablets: 矢田部 YATABYE (MK 13), □田別君矢乎 XTA WAKE 
KIMI YAwo (unnumbered tablet). It also appears in a fragment of a poem (MK 
1613): 

奈尓皮ツ尓 nanipatu ni At the ferry of Naniwa 

佐久矢己乃皮奈 saku YA ko no pana how these blossoms bloom— 

布由己母利 puyugomori awakening from winter 

伊真皮々留部止 iMA pa paruPYE to now they say it is almost spring. 

佐久矢□□皮奈 saku YA (ko no?) pana These blossoms that are in bloom. 

This usage also appears in Nihon shoki: 矢田皇女 Princess YATA (NSG), 
and 矢田部 YATABYE (NSG). This usage is somewhat prevalent in Man’yōshū, 
though the majority of cases are not logographic, but simple semantograms of 矢 
‘arrow.’ 


MYS 3225 

吉咲八師 YOSIWEYAsi But that is fine, 

浦者無友 URA PA NAKU TOMO though we have no bay— 

吉畫矢寺 YOSIWEYAsi that is fine, 

礒者無友 ISWO PA NAKU TOMO though we have no rocky beach— 

奥津浪 OKITU NAMI you fishing boat with the divers, 

諍榜入来 SINWOGI KOGIRI KO push your way over here, 

白水郎之釣船 AMA NO TURIBUNE rowing over the waves in the offing! 

 

箭 


OJ: ya OC: *tsens 

LH: tsianh EMC: tsjänh GO: semu KN: sen 

NOM: tên, tiễn SV: tiến, tiễn SK: cyen 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ ya ‘arrow,’ as 箭 is a bamboo arrow. 
There is only one example of this kungana in Nihon shoki: 箭田珠勝大兄皇子 
Prince YATA [NO] TAMAKATU [NO] OPOYE (NSG). A fragment of a name on 
a bamboo tablet contains this graph: 箭口朝臣大足 YAX ASOMI OPOTARI 
(MKK 9:13). 

This phonogram appears in Izumo fudoki, mainly toponyms: 赤 箭 
KAMINOYA, 箭山 Mount YA, and 幡箭 PATAYA. It is also in Hitachi 
fudoki: 箭括 YAPAZU, a surname. 

 

鹽 


OJ: yamu OC: *jam 

LH: jam EMC: jiäm GO: yemu KN: yemu 

NOM: diêm SV: diêm, riêm SK: yem 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in Izumo fudoki: 鹽冶郷 
Yamuya Village, and 鹽夜社 Yamuya Shrine. 

 

延 


OJ: ye OC: *lan 

LH: jan EMC: jiän GO: yemu KN: yen 

NOM: dan SV: diên, ruyên SK: yen 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in the name of a domain 
included in the federation called Benshin: 馬延國 *ma-jan or *ma-jen. This 
phonogram also has multiple readings, like 移. In Nihon shoki this phonogram 
transcribes the personal name, 延那斯 Yenasi, which is also written in a quote 
from Paekche pongi as 移那斯 Yenasi. 

This phonogram also appears in Kojiki, and is the main graph to transcribe ye. 
Examples include the following from a song: 

KK 2 

阿遠夜麻迩 awoyama ni In the blue mountains 

奴延波那伎奴 nuye pa nakinu the thrush has called out. 

佐怒都登理 sanwotu tori The bird of the true field, 

岐藝斯波登與牟 kigisi pa toyomu the pheasants are rowdy. 

爾波都登理 nipatu tori The bird of the yard, 

迦祁波那久 kakye pa naku the chickens are cackling. 


This phonogram appears once in Nihon shoki’s poetry. 

NSK 23 

異能知能 inoti no You young men who 

摩曾祁務比苔破 masokyemu pito pa are so full of life— 

多々瀰許莽 tatami komo take a branch of white oak of 

弊愚利能夜摩能 pyeguri no yama no multi-layered Mount Heguri. 

志邏伽之餓延塢 sirakasi ga ye wo Stick in your hair, 

于受珥左勢 uzu ni sase and adorn your head. 

許能固 kono kwo Even you, my child. 

This phonogram appears 56 times in Man’yōshū, and along with 要, is the 
main phonogram to transcribe ye. 

MYS 807 

宇豆都仁波 ututu nipa There is no way 

安布余志勿奈子 apu yosi mo nasi for us to meet in reality. 

奴婆多麻能 nubatama no See me in your 

用流能伊昧仁越 yworu no ime ni wo dreams at night, 

都伎提美延許曽 tugite miye koso black as ink. 

 

移 


OJ: ye OC: *lai 

LH: jai > je EMC: jie GO: i KN: i 

NOM: di, day, giay, rơi SV: di, ri, gi SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram, as mentioned under OJ: i, belongs to the PBS. There is 
some evidence that this phonogram also had the reading /ye/, which may have 
been a transitional reading from OC to EMC. Coblin (1983:149) reconstructs the 
Eastern Han pronunciation of this graph as *jie, showing that the nucleus was 
likely the mid front vowel /e/ and not the high front one /i/. Schuessler 
(2009:213) seems to agree. 

A good example of this usage appears in Shoki: 阿賢移那斯 ake yenasi. 
The apparent Japanese version of this name is 延那斯 Yenasi. This name also 
appears in the main record as well as in the quotes from Paekche pongi. The 
opposite may also be true, however, and the nuclear vowel was actually the 
fronted one. It is difficult to know, so I list this graph under both headings <i> 
and <ye>. 

 

叡 


OJ: ye OC: *los or *lots 

LH: juas EMC: jiwäih GO: ye KN: yei 

NOM: NA SV: duệ SK: ye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The earliest example appears in the 
early poetry contained in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu: 

伊加留我乃 ikaruga no Our great ruler’s name 

止美能乎何波乃 tomi no wogapa no will never be forgotten, 

多叡婆許曾 tayeba koso even if the brook 

和何於保支美乃 wa ga opokimi no Tomi in Ikaruga 

弥奈和須良叡米 mina wasurayeme should cease to flow in its bed. 

This phonogram is used in the liturgies, which I have already posited actually 


reflect a state of early Old Japanese (2001:26): 伊加志夜久波叡 ikasiya kupa 
ye ‘flourish like the thick branches of the mulberry’ (NT 2) and 佐加叡志米賜 
sakayesime TAMAPYE ‘that you may be made to prosper’ (NT 2). 

This phonogram also appears in Nihon shoki, once in the annotational notes: 
肖、此云阿叡 “ ‘protective arm pad worn by archers’ is called aye.” This 
phonogram is used twice in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 4428 

和我世奈乎 wa ga sena wo I have sent 

都久志波夜利弖 tukusi pa yarite my husband to Tsukushi 

宇都久之美 utukusimi and miss him dearly. 

叡比波登加奈々 yepi pa tokana na Perhaps I should sleep 

阿夜尓可毛禰牟 aya ni kamo nemu with the cord of my robe tied. 

 

曳 


OJ: ye OC: *lats 

LH: jas EMC: jiäih GO: yei KN: yei 

NOM: dại, dái, dài SV: dệ, duệ SK: ye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It is the main phonogram in Nihon 
shoki to transcribe ye, appearing in one annotational note, and 25 times in poetry: 
荑、此云波曳 “ ‘the graph 荑 sprout’ is read paye” (NSG). 

NSK 86 

於岐毎慕與 okime mo yo Alas Okime, 

阿甫瀰能於岐毎 apumi no okime Okime from Afumi— 

阿須用利簸 asu ywori pa tomorrow you return to hide 

瀰野磨我倶利底 miyamagakurite in the mountains and I will 

彌曳孺哿謨阿羅牟 miyezu kamo aramu be able to see you no more. 

This phonogram also appears twice in Man’yōshū, but both are in border 
poems. 

MYS 4321 

可之古伎夜 kasikwoki ya Filled with trepidation 

美許等加我布理 mikoto kagapuri I receive the august command— 

阿須由利也 asu yuri ya From tomorrow I likely will 

加曳我牟多禰牟 kaye ga muta nemu be sleeping with straw, 

伊牟奈之尓志弖 imu nasi ni site without my beloved. 

This phonogram is also used once in the imperial edicts. 如是醜事者聞曳自 
KAKU [NO] SIKOGOTO PA KIKOyezi ‘Such filthy acts will probably not be handed 
down (to others)’ (SM 17). 

 

遥 


OJ: ye OC: *jau 

LH: jau EMC: jiäu GO: yeu KN: yeu 

NOM: rao SV: dao, rao, giao SK: ywo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It occurs in one poem in Nihon shoki, 
which Mori (1991:243) lists as ywo instead of ye. However, as noted below, this 
graph appears twice in one Man’yōshū poem, both times clearly transcribing ye. 
The usual explanation for 阿遥比 is that aywopi is a variant form of ayupi ‘leg 
straps.’ For the time being I view this as a variant form. 


NSK 74 

飫瀰能古簸 omi no kwo pa The servant of the crown, 

多倍能波伽摩嗚 tape no pakama wo arranging his hemp trousers 

那々陛嗚絁 nanapye wo si and his seven-fold armor, 

儞播儞陀々始諦 nipa ni tatasite is standing out in the garden. 

阿遥比那陀須暮 ayepi nadasu mo He straightens his leg straps. 

This graph appears twice in one poem in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3309 

物不念 MONO OMOPAZU While walking along the road 

路行去裳 MITI YUKU YUKU MO without being deep in thought 

青山乎 AWOYAMA wo when I looked back up 

振酒見者 PURISAKE MIREBA at the blue mountains 

都追慈花 tutuzi PANA there was a beautiful maiden, 

尓太遥越賣 niPOye wotomye colorful as the azalea blossoms. 

作樂花 SAKURABANA A maiden in full bloom 

佐可遥越賣 sakaye wotomye like the cherry blossoms. 

汝乎叙母 NARE wo zo mo People say that 

吾尓依云 WARE ni YOSU TO IPU you are attracted to me. 

吾乎叙物 WARE wo zo MO People say that 

汝尓依云 NARE ni YOSU TO IPU I am attracted to you. 

汝者如何念也 NA PA IKA NI OMOPU What do you think? 

 

要 


OJ: ye OC: *ʔiauh 

LH: ʔiauh EMC: ʔjiäu GO: yeu KN: yeu 

NOM: yêu, yếu, eo, éo SV: yêu, yếu SK: ywo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only in Man’yōshū, but it is 
the primary graph used to transcribe ye, appearing in the anthology a total of 70 
times. 

MYS 1418 

石激 IPABASIRU Yes, spring has come 

垂見之上乃 TARUMI NO UPE no when the true bracken 

左和良妣乃 sawarabi no standing by the waterfall 

毛要出春尓 mwoye IDURU PARU ni gushing forth from the boulder 

成来鴨 NARI NI KYERU KAMO has shot forth its buds. 

 

穎 


OJ: ye OC: *weŋʔ 

LH: weŋʔ EMC: jiwäŋʔ GO: yau KN: yei 

NOM: giảnh, nhảnh SV: dĩnh SK: yeng 

Usage / History: 

This usage belongs to the LJS. It appears once in Shinshaku kegon onshiki, 
where 簫 ‘panpipes’ is glossed as 布穎 puye. There also is a wooden fragment 
(mokkan) excavated from Dazaifu which contains the toponym 薩麻穎娃(郡) 
Satuma Yee District (representing a long vowel). In neighboring Ōsumi Province 
there is a district Soo traditionally written as 囎唹. The place name 紀伊 for 
Kii also comes to mind. It is possible that Old Japanese, like modern Ryūkyūan, 


had compensatory lengthening for monosyllables. These renditions may be a 
vestige of this. 

 

兄 


OJ: ye OC: *hwaŋ 

LH: hyaŋ EMC: xwiajŋ GO: kiyau KN: kuwei 

NOM: huênh, huyênh SV: huynh SK: hyeng 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ ye ‘older.’ It is possible that this usage was 
modeled after that on the peninsula. Koryŏgi records, 次太大兄、比二品 “Next 
is Great da-hyaŋ, which is comparable to the second rank” (Takeuchi 1977:34). 

This usage was quite popular, and appears in the earliest extant records 
preserved in Japan. In Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu we find it in the name 山代大 
兄王 Prince YAMASIRO OPOYE. In the Mino Census of 702 there is the name 兄 
麻 呂 YEmaro and 兄屋 賣 YEYAmye. On the Sairinji Buddha statue 
inscription (ca. 659) we find the name 長兄 NAGAYE. 

This usage also appears in Kojiki in names like 兄比賣 YEpimye (KG) or 
兄師木 YEsiKWI (KG), which possibly are not really names as much as rather 
vague designations: ‘elder X’ or ‘elder Y.’ Nihon shoki contains examples much 
like those in Kojiki: 兄猾 YEUKASI (NSG), 兄磯城 YESIKWI (NSG), and 
兄倉下 YEKURAZI (NSG). 

There are a number of similar usages in Man’yōshū, but perhaps the best 
known example is the cryptic poem, number nine. My translation of the first two 
extremely cryptic lines follows that of Vovin (2002:456–458). 

MYS 9 

莫囂圓隣 nacuh-oi tolal-in When I look up at 

之大相七兄爪謁氣 thyeta-po-ni-ke-ca mud-ke the evening moon, I asked— 

吾瀬子之 WA GA SEKWO GA at the base of 

射立為兼 ITATASERIkyemu the sacred oak tree that 

五可新何本 ITUkasi ga MOTO my beloved had planted. 

Thus this is actually the remnant of a Paekche or Silla poem, the first two 
stanzas preserving the Old Korean rendition, while the last three stanzas have 
been converted into Old Japanese. As can be seen, 兄 here is not ye, but is ke, 
based on the EMC xwiajŋ. An example of 兄 transcribing ye in Man’yōshū 
appears below: 

MYS 196 

然有鴨 SIKARE KAMO Is it because of this? 

綾尓憐 AYA ni KANASIMI I feel deep sadness, 

宿兄鳥之 NUYEDORI no like the unrequited love of 

片戀嬬 KATAKWOPWIDUMA the thrush longing for its mate, 

朝鳥 ASA TORI NO or the morning bird 

徃来為君之 KAYWOPASU KIMI GA flying back and forth, 

夏草乃 NATUGUSA no and my thoughts for you droop 

念之萎而 OMOPI siNAYETE as the wilting summer grass. 

 

江 


OJ: ye OC: *krôŋ 

LH: kɔŋ EMC: kåŋ GO: kau KN: kau 

NOM: giang, nhăng SV: giang SK: kang 


Usage / History: 

This kungana causes the reader to connect 江 ‘great river’ to OJ ye ‘river 
inlet.’ This usage appears in Kojiki in toponyms like 長江 NAGAYE (KG), 大 
江 OPOYE (KG), or a name such as 墨江大神 ‘the great deity SUMIYE’ (KG). 
In Nihon shoki examples are limited to names like 磯城縣主葉江 PAYE, the 
district governor of SIKWI (NSG), 堀江 PORIYE (NSG), or 瑞江浦嶋子 
MIDUNOYE URASIMAKWO (NSG). 

This kungana also appears in Man’yōshū. It appears in the name 清江 
SUMINOYE and others. 

MYS 252 

荒栲 ARATAPE NO At the bay of Fujie 

藤江之浦尓 PUDIYE NO URA ni of rough fabric 

鈴寸釣 SUZUKWI TURU will I be mistaken as a 

白水郎跡香将見 AMA TO KA MIRAMU diver catching sea bass? 

旅去吾乎 TABI YUKU WARE wo The wayfarer that I am. 

 

枝 


OJ: ye OC: *ke 

LH: kie EMC: tśje GO: si KN: si 

NOM: chi SV: chi SK: ci 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ ye ‘branch.’ The earliest datable 
examples appear in the Mino Census of 702: 百枝賣 MWOMWOYEmye. This 
kungana also appears in Kojiki in a number of names: 大枝王 Prince OPOYE, 
矢 河枝比 賣 YAKAPAYE Pimye, and 惠 賀 長枝 NAGAYE of Wega. 
Examples of this kungana in Nihon shoki include names like 大葉枝皇子 
Prince OPOPAYE (NSG), 河邊百枝臣 KAPApye MOMOYE OMI (NSG), and 
五百枝 IPOYE (NSG). 

There is one example of this usage in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3256 

數々丹 SIKUSIKU NI She will probably not be 

不思人叵 OMOPAZU PITO PA thinking constantly of me, 

雖有 ARURAMEDO but alas, I will not 

蹔文吾者 SIMASIKU mo A PA be able to forget her 

忘枝沼鴨 WASURAYENU KAMO for at least a little while. 

 

吉 


OJ: ye OC: *kit 

LH: kit EMC: kjit GO: kiti KN: kitu 

NOM: kiết, cát SV: cát SK: kil 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ ye ‘good, fortunate.’ This usage is 
generally confined to the place name 住吉 SUMIYE, which appears in both 
Nihon shoki and Man’yōshū. This usage also appears in Harima fudoki in the 
place name 吉川 YEGAPA and 大吉川 OPOYEGAPA. It also appears in Hitachi 
fudoki in 吉前邑 YESAKI Village. 

 


炎 


OJ: yemu OC: *lam 

LH: jam EMC: jiäm GO: yemu KN: yemu 

NOM: viêm SV: viêm SK: yem 

Usage / History: 

This usage belongs to the LJS, and appears as the toponym 飛炎 Pwiyemu, 
which appears in ancient documents in possession of Shōsōin. This same 
toponym appears on several mokkan (MK 2015, 2020). 

 

與 


OJ: yo OC: *la 

LH: ja EMC: jiwo GO: yo KN: yo 

NOM: dữ SV: dữ, giữ SK: ye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS, used in the name of the queen’s heir, as 
recorded in Wei zhi: 台與 *də-yɑ. This phonogram also appears on the Chyangnyeng 
Silla inscription (561) in the name 大等與古奈末 *dai-təng-ja-kɔ of the 
11th rank. It also appears on the Hamcwu Silla King hunting stele (568), in the 
name 喙部與難大舎 *ja-nan of the 12th rank from the First Quarter of the 
Capital. 

This phonogram also appears in the earliest extant corpus of Japanese texts, 
appearing in the now lost inscription on the Iyo Dōgo Hot springs stele, 
supposedly dated around 596 (though it may actually date much later). The 
toponym in question is 夷與村 Iyo Village. This phonogram appears five times 
in the liturgies, four of which represent yori ‘from’: 北方佐渡与里乎知能所乎 
奈牟多知疫鬼之住加登定賜比 KITA [NO] MO [PA] sadwo yori woti no TOKORO 
wo namutati EKI [NO] ONI NO SUMIka to SADAMETAMApi “From the direction of 
the north, (the deities) have determined that the dwellings of you, the demons of 
pestilence, will be the distant places from Sado Island northward…” (NT 16). 
This phonogram appears on a number of mokkan: 伊与国伊与郡 Iyo Province 
Iyo District (MK 3561), 与曽布女 YosopuMYE (unnumbered tablet), and 与祢 
万呂 Yonemaro (unnumbered tablet). 

This phonogram is generally avoided by the Kojiki scribe/editor, because of 
its grammatical use in classical Chinese syntax, meaning ‘and.’ There are, 
however, seven examples of this graph in the early Kojiki poetry: 

KK 6 

阿波母與 a pa mo yo Because I too 

賣迩斯阿禮婆 mye ni si areba am but a woman, 

那遠岐弖 na wo kite other than you 

遠波那志 wo pa nasi I have no other man. 

那遠岐弖 na wo kite Other than you 

都麻波那斯 tuma pa nasi I have no other spouse. 

阿夜加岐能 ayakaki no At the bottom of 

布波夜賀斯多爾 pupayaga sita ni the veil of finely woven cloth— 

牟斯夫須麻 musibusuma at the bottom of 

爾古夜賀斯多爾 nikwoyaga sita ni the soft bedding— 

多久夫須麻 takurbusuma at the bottom of the gently 

佐夜具賀斯多爾 sayaguga sita ni rustling mulberry sheets— 

阿和由岐能 awayuki no please lie with me, 


和加夜流牟泥遠 waka yaru mune wo taking my young breast, 

多久豆怒能 takudunu no soft like powder snow, 

斯路岐多陀牟岐 sirwoki tadamuki in your white arms, 

曾陀多岐 sodataki wrapping your hands, 

多多岐麻那賀理 tataki managari those true hands 

麻多麻傳 matamade around my back 

多麻傳佐斯麻岐 tamade sasi maki with your arms outstretched 

毛毛那賀迩 mwomwo naga ni like jewels on a string 

伊遠斯那世 i wo si nase and your legs stretched out. 

登與美岐 toyo miki Drink this 

多弖麻都良世 tatematurase eternal wine. 

This phonogram is used three times in Nihon shoki annotational notes, and 
seven times in poetry: 天吉葛、此云阿摩能與佐圖羅。一云、與會豆羅 
“ ‘heavenly auspicious vine’ is read ama no yosatura. Another tradition says this 
is yosotura” (NSG). 

NSK 91 

於彌能姑能 omi no kwo no The son of the Omi has 

耶賦能之魔柯枳 yapu no sibagaki made a fine brushwood fence. 

始陀騰余瀰 sitatoyomi But if the earth quakes 

那爲我與釐據魔 nawi ga yorikoba that brushwood fence 

耶黎夢之魔柯枳 yaremu sibagaki will likely fall to pieces. 

This is the primary phonogram to transcribe yo in Man’yōshū, appearing 171 
times. 

MYS 27 

淑人乃 YOKI PITO no Good people of old took a good 

良跡吉見而 YOSI TO YOKU MITE look at this place, 

好常言師 YOSI TO IPIsi saying it was good, Yoshino. 

芳野吉見与 YOSINWO YOKU MIyo You good people here, 

良人四来三 YOKI PITO YOKU MI take a good look at Yoshino. 

This phonogram also appears on the Bussoku stone inscription: 

BSS 3 

与伎比止乃 yoki pito no I cannot see 

麻佐米尓美祁牟 masame ni mikyemu even the footprints that 

美阿止須良乎 miato sura wo the righteous men must 

和礼波衣美須弖 ware pa emisute have seen before their eyes— 

伊波尓惠利都久 ipa ni werituku engrave them on the rock. 

多麻尓惠利都久 tama ni werituku Engrave them on the jewel. 

 

餘 


OJ: yo OC: *la 

LH: ja EMC: jiwo GO: yo KN: yo 

NOM: dư, rư SV: dư SK: ye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. This phonogram is often abbreviated to 
余. It appears in the name of the land of 夫餘 *pu-yɑ (what is later called Puyo). 
Wei zhi also mentions a king of Puyo known as 麻餘 *ma-yɑ. 


This phonogram also appears on the Kwangkaytho stele: 夫余 *pu-yɑ, 余 
城 *yɑ fortress, and 賣勾余民国 the people of *mɛ-ko-yɑ. This phonogram 
also appears on the Inariyama tumulus sword: 加差披余 Ka-sa-pai-yo. 

This phonogram appears in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu, in Suiko’s name: 止 
余美 気 加 志 支 夜 比 売 天 皇 Empress Toyo Mike Kasikiya Pimye. This 
phonogram appears on a number of mokkan: 余志 野 女 YosiNWOMYE 
(unnumbered tablet), and a fragment of a poem: 波流奈礼波伊万志□□□…由 
米余伊母波夜久伊□□奴□止利阿波志□ paru nareba imasi XXX…yume yo i 
mo payaku iXXnuX tori apasiX… ‘Because is is spring / right now… / never 
even (think of sleep) / quickly… / you harmonized with me’ (MK 179). 

This is the principal phonogram used in Kojiki: 故阿佐米余玖 KARE asame 
yoku ‘Thus, look around well…’ (KG), 比賣多多良伊須氣余理比賣 Princess 
Pimye Tatara Isukeyori (KG). 

KK 8 

阿加陀麻波 akadama pa The red beads 

袁佐閇比迦禮杼 wo sape pikaredo glow even on the string, 

斯良多麻能 siratama no but your appearance, 

岐美何余曾比斯 kimi ga yosopisi white like a pearl, 

多布斗久阿理祁理 taputwoku arikyeri is indeed magnificent. 

This phonogram appears twice in the annotational notes and nine times in the 
poetry in Nihon shoki: 泉津平坂、此云余母都比羅佐可 “ ‘the flat hill of 
Yomi’ is read yomotu pirasaka” (NSG). 

NSK 97 

駄開能 take no Wonderful, flourishing bamboo 

以矩美娜開余嚢開 ikumidake yodake with long joints and leaves— 

謨等陛嗚麼 motopye woba We will make a koto 

莒等儞都倶唎 koto ni tukuri out of the base of it, 

須衞陛嗚麼 suyepye woba and make a flute 

府曳儞都倶唎 puye ni tukuri out of the top of it. 

This phonogram appears in Man’yōshū 142 times. 

MYS 873 

余呂豆余尓 yoroduyo ni Let us pass down this tradition 

可多利都夏等之 kataritugye to si to the myriad generations— 

許能多氣仁 kono take ni it seems she waved 

比例布利家良之 pire purikyerasi her scarf on this peak, 

麻通羅佐用嬪面 matura saywo pimye Princess Sayo of Matsura. 

 

余 


OJ: yo OC: *la 

LH: ja EMC: jiwo GO: yo KN: yo 

NOM: dư, rư SV: dư SK: ye 

Usage / History: 

See 餘 above. 

 

已 


OJ: yo OC: *ləʔ 

LH: jəʔ > jɨʔ EMC: jiɨ GO: i KN: i 

NOM: dĩ SV: dĩ SK: i 


Usage / History: 

This is a somewhat difficult phonogram to track, as it is easily confused with 
己 ko. Based on the currently available data, I place this phonogram in the PBS. 
It appears on the Inariyama tumulus sword inscription in the name 弖已加利獲 
居 Teyokari Waka. 

This phonogram also appears on in a Buddhist inscription preserved in the 
Gangōji Temple record, in the name of Suiko: 等已彌居加斯夜比彌乃彌己等 
Toyo Mikasiya Pimye no Mikoto. It also appears in the rendition of the name of 
Shōtoku Taishi as preserved in an inscription said to have been written on the 
Hōryūji Tenjukoku mandala tapestry: 等已刀彌彌乃彌己等 Toyo Twomimi no 
Mikoto. 

This phonogram fell out of use, likely because of its grammatical use in 
classical Chinese syntax. One meaning of 已 is ‘only’ or ‘very.’ 

 

豫 


OJ: yo OC: *lah 

LH: jah EMC: jiwoh GO: yo KN: yo 

NOM: dự SV: dư, dự, dụ, rư, rữ SK: ye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It is often abbreviated to 予. It appears 
early on in the name 伊豫 or 伊予 Iyo Province. Of the three examples of this 
phonogram in Kojiki, two transcribe Iyo, while the third is 豫母都志許賣 
yomotusikomye ‘the ugly woman of Hades’ (KG). 

This phonogram is the primary graph used to transcribe yo in Nihon shoki, 
appearing 29 times in the poetry. 

NSK 10 

伊莽波豫 ima pa yo We have now won! 

伊莽波豫 ima pa yo For now we have won! 

阿々時夜塢 aa si ya wo Fools! Serves you right! 

伊莽儾而毛 imada ni mo Have the had enough, 

阿誤豫 ago yo you, my troops? 

伊莽儾而毛 imada ni mo Have the had enough, 

阿誤豫 agwo yo you, my lads? 

This phonogram appears quite often in Man’yōshū, though it is frequently 
used to represent arakazime ‘in advance.’ It is also used for Iyo in many 
headnotes, but the phonogram used to transcribe yo actually only appears in one 
poem: 

MYS 322 

極此疑 kogosi KAMO And you stood 

伊豫能高嶺乃 iyo no TAKANE no on Izaniwa Hill, 

射狭庭乃 IzaNIPA no a high peak in Iyo 

崗尓立而 WOKA ni TATASITE that is rugged and steep.... 

 

預 


OJ: yo OC: *laʔ 

LH: jaʔ EMC: jiwoʔ GO: yo KN: yo 

NOM: dự, dựa SV: dự SK: ye 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It is sometimes used to transcribe the 
toponym 伊預 Iyo in the Nara era. This phonogram appears in Nihon shoki, 
once in an annotational note and in three poems: 謠、此云宇哆預瀰 “ ‘song’ is 
read as uta yomi” (NSG). 

NSK 113 

耶麻鵝播爾 yamagapa ni There are two mandarin ducks 

烏志賦頴都威底 wosi putatu wite at the mountain stream, 

陀虞毘預倶 tagupi yoku paired off so nicely. 

陀虞陛屢伊慕乎 tagupyeru imo wo Who has taken my beloved 

多例柯威爾雞武 tare ka winikyemu who paired off so well with me? 

 

予 


OJ: yo OC: *lah 

LH: jah EMC: jiwoh GO: yo KN: yo 

NOM: dự SV: dư, dự, dụ, rư, rữ SK: ye 

Usage / History: 

See 豫 above. 

 

譽 


OJ: yo OC: *la 

LH: ja EMC: jiwo GO: yo KN: yo 

NOM: dợ SV: dư, dự, du, rư SK: ye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears once in an annotational 
note in Nihon shoki: 湌 泉 之 竃 、 此 云 譽 母 都 俳 遇 比 “ ‘hearth of the 
underworld’ is read yomotu pegupi” (NSG). 

 

世 


OJ: yo OC: *lhats 

LH: śas MC: śjäih GO: se KN: sei 

NOM: thá, thế, thé SV: thế SK: syey 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ yo ‘world, society.’ Nihon shoki 
preserves names such as 世襲足媛 YOSO TARASI PIMYE (NSG) and 瀛津世 
襲 OKITU YOSO (NSG). 

This usage also appears in Man’yōshū, but primarily to transcribe TOKOYO. 

MYS 2885 

左夜深而 saYWO PUKETE As the night wore on 

妹乎念出 IMWO wo OMOPIDE I recalled my beloved 

布妙之 SIKITAPE NO and lamented so bitterly 

枕毛衣世二 MAKURA mo SOYO ni that the spread out bedding, 

嘆鶴鴨 NAGEKITURU KAMO my pillow, shook. 

 

吉 


OJ: yo OC: *kit 

LH: kit EMC: kjit GO: kiti KN: kitu 

NOM: kiết, cát SV: cát SK: kil 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ yo ‘good, auspicious.’ In the Yamashiro 
Atago Census of 726 we find the name 吉刀自賣 which appears to represent 


YOtwozimye, but also might be KITItwozimye. In Nihon shoki there are two 
names with this kungana: 鰐積吉事 WANI TUMI YOGOTO (NSG), and 菟田吉 
穩 UDA [NO] YONABARI ‘Yonabari of Uda District’ (NSG). 

This kungana also appears in Man’yōshū a total of five times, but all 
transcribe Yonabari (吉隠, 吉名張 or 吉魚張). 

MYS 2190 

吾門之 WA GA KADWO NO The miscanthus at the gate 

淺茅色就 ASADI IRODUKU of my house is in full color. 

吉魚張能 YONABARI no It seems that the autumn leaves 

浪柴乃野之 NAMISIBA no NWO NO of the trees on Namishiba Plain 

黄葉散良新 MOMIDI TIRUrasi in Yonabari are scattering. 

 

四 


OJ: yo OC: *sis 

LH: sis > sih EMC: sih GO: si KN: si 

NOM: tứ SV: tứ SK: so 

Usage / History: 

This kungana calls to mind OJ yo ‘four.’ This usage is only found in 
Man’yōshū, appearing five times. 

MYS 27 

淑人乃 YOKI PITO no Good people of old took a good 

良跡吉見而 YOSI TO YOKU MITE look at this place, 

好常言師 YOSI TO IPIsi saying it was good, Yoshino. 

芳野吉見与 YOSINWO YOKU MIyo You good people here, 

良人四来三 YOKI PITO YOKU MI take a good look at Yoshino. 

 

代 


OJ: yo OC: *lə̂ kh 

LH: dəh EMC: dậih GO: dai KN: tai 

NOM: đời SV: đại SK: doy 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader the OJ word yo ‘reign or dynasty.’ This 
usage is only found in Man’yōshū, used twice. 

MYS 1461 

晝者咲 PIRU PA SAKI The Albizia, the sleeping tree 

夜者戀宿 YWORU PA KWOPWINURU whose flowers bloom in the day 

合歡木花 NEBU NO PANA and slumber at night. 

君耳将見哉 KIMI NOMWI MIME YA Shall only I gaze at it? 

和氣佐倍尓見代 wake sape ni MIYO You view it also! 

 

呼 


OJ: yo OC: *hâ or *hâh 

LH: ha, hah EMC: xuo, xuoh GO: ko KN: ko 

NOM: ho, hò, hô SV: hô SK: hwo 

Usage / History: 

This kungana is somewhat cryptic. There is only one example of this usage 
in Man’yōshū, so the proper interpretation is not completely clear. It seems that 
the graph 呼 ‘to call out’ is intended here, suggesting yo, a similar word used as 
a greeting in some forms of vulgar English. 


MYS 723 

常呼二跡 TOKOYO ni TO It is not as if 

吾行莫國 WA GA YUKANAKUNI I am going to the Eternal Land. 

小金門尓 WOKANATWO ni Thinking about how you, 

物悲良尓 MONOGANASIra ni my child, young lady, 

念有之 OMOPYERIsi stood at the small metal gate 

吾兒乃刀自緒 A GA KWO no twozi WO with such a somber look— 

野干玉之 NUBATAMA NO remembering you day and night, 

夜晝跡不言 YWORU PIRU TO IPAZU black as ink, 

念二思 OMOPU ni si I have lost weight. 

吾身者痩奴 A GA MWI PA YASEnu Because of my lamenting 

嘆丹師 NAGEKU NI si even my sleeves 

袖左倍沾奴 SWODE sape NUREnu have become wet. 

 

齒 


OJ: yo OC: *k-hjəʔ 

LH: tśhəʔ EMC: tśhɨʔ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: xỉ, xỉa xẻ, xể SV: xỉ SK: chi 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader the OJ word yo of yopapi ‘age.’ This 
usage is found once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 2773 

刺竹 SASU TAKE NO Hide within the joint 

齒隠有 YOGOMORITE ARE of the bamboo stalk sticking out! 

吾背子之 WA GA SEKWO GA If you, my beloved, 

吾許不来者 WAGARISI KOZU had not come to my place 

吾将戀八方 ARE KWOPWIME YAMO would I have fallen in love? 

 

由 


OJ: yu OC: *ju 

LH: ju EMC: jiəu GO: yu KN: yuu 

NOM: dô, do, ro SV: du, do, ro SK: ywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the WS. It appears in Wei zhi in the toponym 優 
由國 *ʔu-ju domain. This phonogram appears in early texts to transcribe the 
palace of Empress Suiko: 等由良宮 Toyura Palace and 等由羅宮 Toyura 
Palace. This phonogram appears three times in the liturgies: 持由麻波利仕奉禮 
留幣帛乎、神主祝部等受賜弖 MOTIyumapari TUKAPEMATUreru MITEGURA wo 
KAMUNUSI PAPURIBYERA UKETAMAPARIte “…the offerings presented that have 
been purified are received and presented by the shrine officiators and the ritual 
officiators…” (NT 1). This phonogram appears on a number of mokkan: 阿由 
ayu ‘trout’ (MK 190), 石川由恵万呂ISIKAPA Yuwemaro (MKK12:138), 知夫 
利 郡由良 里 Tiburi District Yura Village (MKK 5:85), and 比由 piyu 
‘amaranth’ (MK 2214). 

This is also the only phonogram used in Kojiki to transcribe yu: 矛由氣 
POKO yuke ‘squeeze (the handle) of his halberd....’ 

KK 15 

多多那米弖 tatanamete Having proceeded through 

伊那佐能夜麻能 inasa no yama no the trees on Mount Inasa 


許能麻用母 ko no ma ywo mo where shields are arrayed, 

伊由岐麻毛良比 iyuki mamworapi and fought our battles 

多多加閇婆 tatakapeba while keeping watch, 

和禮波夜惠奴 ware pa ya wenu how I am famished. 

志麻都登理 simatu tori You birds of the island, 

宇上加比賀登母 ukapi ga tomo friend of the cormorants, 

伊麻須氣爾許泥 ima suke ni kone come now to my rescue. 

This phonogram is quite prevalent in Nihon shoki, appearing in two 
annotational notes, and 13 times in the poetry: 靫、此云由岐 “ ‘quivers’ are 
called yuki” (NSG). 

NSK 46 

于磨臂苔能 umapito no I tell you plainly, 

多菟屢虚等太氐 taturu kotodate making a nobleman’s promise— 

于磋由豆流 usayuduru she is only 

多曳麼菟餓務珥 tayema tugamu ni a spare bowstring for the time 

奈羅陪氐毛餓望 narabete mo ga mo when the one I have breaks. 

This is the main phonogram used to transcribe yu in Man’yōshū, appearing 
roughly 444 times. 

MYS 867 

枳美可由伎 kimi ga yuki Long are the days 

氣那我久奈理奴 ke nagaku narinu since you took your journey. 

奈良遅那留 naradi naru The trees in the courtyard 

志滿乃己太知母 sima no kodati mo along the Nara road 

可牟佐飛仁家里 kamusapwinikyeri have taken on an antique air. 

This phonogram also appears in the Bussoku footprint poems: 

BSS 1 

美阿止都久留 miato tukuru The resounding sound of 

伊志乃比鼻伎波 isi no pibiki pa the rock where the footprints 

阿米尓伊多利 ame ni itari are carved reaches to heaven; 

都知佐閇由須礼 tuti sape yusure the earth even reverberates. 

知々波々賀多米尓 titi papa ga tame ni for father and mother— 

毛呂比止乃多米尓 moropito no tame ni for all people. 

The cursive form of this graph is the basis for hiragana ゆ, while an 
abbreviation of this graph results in katakana ユ. 

 

喩 


OJ: yu OC: *loh 

LH: joh EMC: jiuh GO: yu KN: yu 

NOM: dụ, giộ, nhủ SV: dụ, dũ, giụ SK: ywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This graph appears in Nihon shoki, in 
one annotational note, and 23 times in poetry: 老此云於喩 “ ‘elderly’ is read 
oyu” (NSG). 

NSK 128 

阿箇悟馬能 akagwoma no The red horse hestitates 

以喩企波々箇屢 iyuki pabakaru to move toward 

麻矩儒播羅 makuzupara the true vine field. 


奈爾能都底擧騰 nani no tutekoto Why send a message when you 

多頴尼之曳鶏武 tada nisi yekyemu can just say it directly? 

This phonogram also appears once in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 894 

阿麻能見虚喩 ama no MISWORA yu From the august, heavenly sky 

阿麻賀氣利 amakakeri flying through the firmament 

見渡多麻比 MIWATASItamapi you look down upon us, 

事畢 KOTO WOPARI having finished your assignment— 

 

遊 


OJ: yu OC: *ju 

LH: ju EMC: jiəu GO: yu KN: yuu 

NOM: du SV: du SK: ywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This phonogram appears in a name on 
one mokkan: 阿斗部小殿万呂同遊万呂 ‘AtwoBYE WOTONOmaro and 
Yumaro of the same surname’ (MKK 17:162). It appears in one name in Shoku 
Nihongi: 安遊麻呂 Ayu Maro. It appears in Izumo fudoki in 遊記山 Mount 
Yukwi. This phonogram appears only six times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 111 

古尓 INISIPYE ni Is it because the bird 

戀流鳥鴨 KWOPUru TORI KAMO yearns for the past? 

弓絃葉乃 YUDURUPA no It soars over the imperial well 

三井能上従 MIWI no UPE YWORI by the Yuzuriha tree, 

鳴濟遊久 NAKIWATARI yuku crying out as it flies by. 

 

油 


OJ: yu OC: *ju 

LH: ju EMC: jiəu GO: yu KN: yuu 

NOM: dẫu, dầu, rầu SV: du, ru SK: ywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 4122 

夜麻能多乎理尓 yama no tawori ni On the saddle of the mountain 

許能見油流 kono MIyuru the white heavenly clouds 

安麻能之良久母 ama no sirakumo that I see presently— 

和多都美能 watatumi no please stretch out 

於枳都美夜敝尓 okitu miyapye ni to the palace in the offing 

多知和多里 tatiwatari of the deity of the sea, 

等能具毛利安比弖 tonogumori apite cloud up the whole sky 

安米母多麻波禰 ame mo tamapane and give us rain. 

 

瑜 


OJ: yu OC: *lo 

LH: jo EMC: jiu GO: yu KN: yu 

NOM: du SV: du SK: ywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to CBS. It appears only in Nihon shoki, appearing 
only once in the poetry. 


NSK 88 

飫瀰能古能 omi no kwo no The son of the Omi— 

耶陛耶哿羅哿枳 yapye ya karagaki do you, prince, demand entrance 

瑜屢世登耶瀰古 yuruse to ya mikwo within my two-fold Kara fence? 

 

踰 


OJ: yu OC: *lo 

LH: jo EMC: jiu GO: yu KN: yu 

NOM: NA SV: du SK: ywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears only in Nihon shoki, twice 
in annotational notes: 齋庭、此云踰貳波 “ ‘sacred rice paddy’ is read yunipa” 
(NSG), 齋忌、此云踰既 “ ‘sacred wine’ is read yukwi” (NSG). 

 

愈 


OJ: yu OC: *loʔ 

LH: joʔ EMC: jiuʔ GO: yu KN: yu 

NOM: rũ SV: dũ, rũ SK: ywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, but appears only in Nihon shoki, 
appearing once in the annotational notes and once in the poetry: 㞙、此云愈磨 
理 “ ‘urine’ is read yumari” (NSG). 

NSK 83 

伊儺武斯盧 inamusiro The willow growing along 

呵簸泝比野儺擬 kapaswopi yanagwi the banks of the river bends 

寐逗愈凱麼 midu yukeba with the flow of the water. 

儺弭企於己陀智 nabiki okwitati Fluttering or standing tall 

曾能泥播宇世儒 sono ne pa usezu the roots remain unchanged. 

The editors of the NKBT edition of Nihon shoki argue that the graph in the 
third stanza should be 喩, based on a number of texts, but they have followed the 
Kunaichō text. The editors of the Shōgakkan text have the poem as I have 
provided above, perhaps precisely because they have not used the Kunaichō text 
in their collation. This is a difficult textual issue, as the NKBT editors have relied 
on five different manuscripts here, while the Shōgakkan editors have consulted 
eight different manuscripts. For the time being I have followed the Shōgakkan 
editors. 

 

臾 


OJ: yu OC: *jo 

LH: jo EMC: jiu GO: yu KN: yu 

NOM: dua SV: du SK: ywu, ywong, kwe 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, but only appears in Nihon shoki, 
appearing once in an annotational note: 湯人、此云臾衞 “ ‘a woman in charge 
of the royal bath’ is read yuwe” (NSG). 

 

庾 


OJ: yu OC: *joʔ 

LH: joʔ EMC: jiuʔ GO: yu KN: yu 

NOM: NA SV: dũ, rũ SK: ywu 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and only appears in Nihon shoki, used 
in four different poems: 

NSK 119 

耶麻古曳底 yama kwoyete Though I cross over mountains 

于瀰倭柁留騰母 umi wataru tomo and traverse the ocean, 

於母之樓枳 omosirwoki can I ever forget 

伊麻紀能禹知播 imakwi no uti pa the pleasant land 

倭須羅庾麻旨珥 wasurayumasizi that is Imaki? 

 

弓 


OJ: yu OC: *kwəŋ 

LH: kuŋ EMC: kjuŋ GO: kuu KN: kiu 

NOM: cung SV: cung SK: kwung 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader the OJ word yumi, which is sometimes 
shortened to yu ‘bow.’ It appears fairly early, appearing in the genealogy of 
Prince Shōtoku as preserved in Jōgū Shōtoku hōō teisetsu: 弓削王 Prince 
YUGE. It is also used for three names in Nihon shoki, the above mentioned 
Prince YUGE and 弓月君 YUTUKWI [NO] KIMI, who appears to be an 
immigrant from Paekche. The true reading of this name is thus in some doubt. 

This kungana also appears five times in Man’yōshū poetry. 

MYS 2353 

長谷 PATUSE NO My spouse whom I hid 

弓槻下 YUDUKWI GA SITA NI at the base of the sacred 

吾隠在妻 KAKUSITARU TUMA zelkova tree in Hatsuse— 

赤根刺 AKANE SASI under the moonlit night, 

所光月夜邇 TERERU TUKUYWO ni bright like the madder tree, 

人見點鴨 PITO MItemu KAMO perhaps someone has seen her? 

 

湯 


OJ: yu OC: *lhâŋ 

LH: thaŋ EMC: thâŋ GO: tau KN: tau 

NOM: thang SV: thang, tháng SK: thang, syang 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the mind OJ yu ‘hot water.’ It appears in Kojiki in 
words like 湯津石村 YUTU IPAMURA ‘village of the sacred rock’ (or ‘group 
of sacred rocks,’ KG) and 湯津津間櫛 YUTU TUMA GUSI ‘a scared moonshaped 
comb’ (KG). 

This usage appears in Nihon shoki in words like 湯津爪櫛 YUTU TUMA 
GUSI ‘sacred moon-shaped comb’ (NSG), 湯山 Mount YU (NSG), 吾湯市村 
AYUTI Village (NSG), and 湯津杜木 YUTU KATURA ‘a scared katsura tree’ 
(NSG). 

This usage appears 28 times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 22 

河上乃 KAPA NO PE no On the sacred cluster of 

湯津盤村二 YUTU IPAMURA ni boulders upriver grass 


草武左受 KUSA musazu does not grow. I wish they 

常丹毛冀名 TUNE NImo GAMO NA could forever remain thus. 

常處女煮手 TUNE WOTOMYE NITE Forever like a young maiden. 

 

用 


OJ: ywo OC: *loŋh 

LH: joŋh EMC: jiwoŋh GO: yuu KN: you 

NOM:, dùng, rụng SV: dụng SK: ywong 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. The syllable ywo is quite rare in OJ, so 
there are few words or names that contain it, and this explains why such usages 
are difficult to find. The earliest datable example is from a wooden fragment 
dated 729 which reads 播磨國佐用郡 Parima Province Saywo District (MK 
2080). Another undated fragment reads 播磨国佐用郡佐用郷江川里 Parima 
Province, Saywo District, Saywo Village YEGAPA Hamlet (MK 12655). 

In Kojiki 用 is the sole phonogram used to transcribe ywo: 久羅下那洲多 
陀用幣琉之時 kuragye nasu tadaywopyeru NO TOKI ‘when (the land) floated 
back and forth on the water like a jellyfish...’ (KG); and 香用比賣 KAywo 
Pimye (KG). In the following poem this phonogram appears three times. 

KK 2 

夜知富許能 yatipoko no The august deity 

迦微能美許登波 kamwi no mikoto pa Yachi Hoko 

夜斯麻久爾 yasimakuni could not marry a spouse 

都麻麻岐迦泥弖 tuma makikanete in the land of eight islands. 

登富登富斯 topotoposi Then he heard 

故志能久迩迩 kwosi no kuni ni there was a wise maiden 

佐加志賣遠 sakasimye wo in the far-off land 

阿理登岐加志弖 ari to kikasite of Koshi. 

久波志賣遠 kupasimye wo He heard there was 

阿理登伎許志弖 ari to kikosite a beautiful maiden. 

佐用婆比迩 saywobapi ni Off he hurriedly went 

阿理多多斯 aritatasi to seek her hand in marriage. 

用婆比迩 ywobapi ni He went back and forth 

阿理迦用婆勢 arikaywopase seeking her hand in marriage. 

多知賀遠母 tati ga wo mo Without even undoing 

伊麻陀登加受弖 imada tokazute the belt of his sword— 

淤須比遠母 osupi wo mo without taking off 

伊麻陀登加泥婆 imada tokaneba his cloak 

遠登賣能 wotomye no he pushed repeatedly 

那須夜伊多斗遠 nasu ya itatwo wo on the door to 

淤曾夫良比 osoburapi where the maiden slumbered. 

In Nihon shoki this phonogram is used once in the annotational notes, and six 
times in poetry: 睩、此云麻用弭枳 “ ‘eyebrows’ is read maywobiki” (NSG). 
The following exchange of poems revolves around the OJ word ywo ‘night.’ 
NSK 25 is a question, and the answer is given in NSK 26. 


NSK 25 

珥比麼利 nipibari How many nights have 

菟玖波塢須擬氐 tukupa wo sugwite we spent since passing through 

異玖用伽禰菟流 ikuywo ka neturu Niibari and Tsukuba? 

NSK 26 

伽餓奈倍氐 kaganabete Counting the days— 

用珥波虚々能用 ywo nipa kokono ywo nine nights have come and gone 

比珥波苔塢伽塢 pi nipa towo ka wo and the sun has risen ten times. 

There are only 11 examples of this phonogram in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 217 

秋山 AKIYAMA NO The beautiful maiden like 

下部留妹 SITAPYEru IMWO the leaves of autumn mountains, 

奈用竹乃 naywo TAKE no what did they think 

騰遠依子等者 towo YWORU KWORA PA those supple maidens, 

何方尓 IKASAMA ni tender and delicate 

念居可 OMOPIWORE ka like young bamboo? 

 

欲 


OJ: ywo OC: *lok 

LH: jok EMC: jiwok GO: yoku KN: yoku 

NOM: dục SV: dục, rục SK: ywok 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Izumo fudoki in the 
following line: 阿用郷。本字阿欲 ‘The village of Aywo originally was 
rendered a-ywo.’ This phonogram also appears in Hitachi fudoki in the following 
poem: 

都久波尼爾 tukubane ni On the Tsukuba Peak 

伊保利弖 iporite I set up temporary lodging, 

都麻奈志爾 tuma nasi ni and will it end up 

和我尼牟欲呂波 wa ga nemu yworo pa being a night I spend alone 

波夜母 paya mo without my spouse? 

阿氣奴賀母 akenu kamo Daybreak, hurry and come. 

This phonogram is the primary graph used to transcribe ywo in Man’yōshū, 
appearing 171 times. 

MYS 822 

和何則能尓 wa ga sono ni The plum blossoms 

宇米能波奈知流 ume no pana tiru in my gardent are scattering. 

比佐可多能 pisakata no Or is it that snow 

阿米欲里由吉能 ame ywori yuki no is falling from the sky, 

那何列久流加母 nagarekuru kamo the far-off sky? 

 

容 


OJ: ywo OC: *loŋ 

LH: joŋ EMC: jiwoŋ GO: yuu KN: you 

NOM: dung, rong, rung SV: dung, dong SK: ywong 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in Harima fudoki: 讚容郡 
Saywo District. This phonogram also appears once in Man’yōshū: 


MYS 883 

於登爾吉岐 oto ni kiki I have heard the rumors 

目爾波伊麻太見受 ME nipa imada MIzu but have not seen it yet— 

佐容比賣我 saywo pimye ga Mount ‘I-will-wait-for-you’ 

必禮布理伎等敷 pire puriki to pu Mount Matsura where 

吉民萬通良楊満 kimi matura yama Princess Sayo waved her scarf. 

 

庸 


OJ: ywo OC: *loŋ 

LH: joŋ EMC: jiwoŋ GO: yuu KN: you 

NOM: dong, dung SV: dong SK: ywong 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only in Nihon shoki, used in 
two poems. 

NSK 18 

一云 Another tradition says: 

於朋耆妬庸利 opoki two ywori Occupying himself 

于介伽卑氐 ukagapite with a princess, 

許呂佐務苔 korosamu to he is unaware 

須羅句塢志羅珥 suraku wo sirani that someone spies a chance 

比賣那素寐須望 pimye na swobisu mo from the large gate to kill him. 

 

𠰩 


OJ: ywo OC: *loŋh 

LH: joŋh EMC: jiwoŋh LMC: jywŋ GO: yuu KN: you 

NOM: dọng, dùng, rùng SV: NA SK: NA 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears once in Kakyō hyōshiki in the 
phrase 己能𠰩 kono ywo ‘this night.’ 

 

夜 


OJ: ywo OC: *jah < *jakh 

LH: jah EMC: jiah GO: ya KN: ya 

NOM: dạ SV: dạ, rạ SK: ya, oik 

Usage / History: 

This kungana suggests to the reader OJ ywo ‘night.’ This usage appears in 
Nihon shoki in names like 月夜見尊 TUKWI YWOMI [NO] MIKOTO (NSG) and 
火夜織命 PO [NO] YWORI [NO] MIKOTO (NSG). This usage also appears seven 
times in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 393 

不所見十方 MIYEZU TOMO Even if it is not visible 

孰不戀有米 TARE KWOPWIZARAme who does not yearn for it? 

山之末尓 YAMANO PA ni The moon hesitating to appear 

射狭夜歴月乎 ISA YWOPU TUKWI wo over the edge of the mountains; 

外見而思香 YOSO NI MITE siKA To see it even from a distance. 

This usage also appears in Izumo fudoki: 夜見嶋 YWOMI SIMA ‘Yomi 
Island.’ Also in Harima fudoki we find 五月夜郡 SAYWO District, and a 
person named 狹井連佐夜 SAWI [NO] MURAZI SaYWO. 


Z 

 

 

射 



OJ: za OC: *m-lak or *m-lakh 

LH: źak, źah EMC: ʑiajk or ʑia GO: zia KN: sia 

NOM: xạ SV: xạ SK: syek, sya 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. It is used only once in the peninsular 
source material quoted in Nihon shoki: 任射岐山 nizaki [NO] MURE ‘Mount 
Nizaki.’ An apparently related example is 任存山. Compare the reconstructed 
phonology of the two: 

射 LH źah EMC ʑia 

存 LH dzən EMC dzwən 

If these two are representations of the same mountain, then this suggests two 
possibilities: Paekche made no distinction between a voiced fricative and a 
voiced affricate. Also Paekche may not have made a distinction between the 
vowels /a/ and /ə/. Another possibility is, like with Japanese, Chinese did not 
provide a complete one-to-one match of phonograms with Paekche phonology. It 
is also possible there is a difference in time between the two transcriptions, 
showing evolution in one of the two languages (Chinese versus Paekche), or both. 

This phonogram is used in the Buzen census of 702 in the name 阿射彌勝 
Azami SUGURI. It also appears in the Atago register of 733: 袁射比賣 Woza 
Pimye. 

This phonogram also appears in Shoku Nihongi: 服部連佐射 PATORI 
MURAZI Saza (though some read it saya, 698.91), 波多眞人余射 Pata MABITO 
Yoza (703.1.2), 与射女王 Princess Yoza (706.6.24), and 牟射志 Muzasi 
(765.5.20). This usage also appears in the imperial edicts recorded in Shoku 
Nihongi: 高天原神積坐須皇親神魯岐神魯弥命乃定賜來流天日嗣高御座次乎 
加蘇毘奪將盜止爲而惡逆在奴久奈多夫礼。麻度比。奈良麻呂。古麻呂等伊 
逆 黨 乎 伊射奈 比 率 而 先 内 相 家 乎 圍 而 其 乎 殺 而 TAKAMA [NO] PARA NI 
KAMUDUMARIMAsu SUMYERA GA MURU KAMUrwoki KAMUrwomi [NO] MIKOTO no 
SADAME TAMAPIKYEru AMATU PITUGI TAKAMIKURA [NO] TUGITE wo kaswopi UBAPI 
NUSUMAMU to SITE ASIKU SAKASIMA NI ARU YATUKWO kunatabure, madwopi, 
naramaro, kwomaroRA i SAKASIMA NI ARU TOMOGARA wo izanapi PIKITE MADU 
NAISAU [NO] IPYE wo KAKUMITE SO wo KOROSITE ‘They planned to steal the order 
of succession to the heavenly sun-succeeding throne that was established by the 
male and female deities who came from the high plain of heaven and who are the 
ancestors of our imperial ruler. Kunatabure, Madohi, Naramaro, Komaro, and 
others induced and led their wicked band, and first surrounded the house of the 
Interior Minister and killed him...’ (SM 19). 

This phonogram is the primary graph used in Man’yōshū to transcribe za. It 
appears in examples such as 加射之 kazasi ‘hair ornament’ (MYS 38), 伊射利 
izari ‘catch fish’ (MYS 252), 左射礼浪 sazareNAMI ‘ripples’ (MYS 206, 3012), 
and 和射 waza ‘action, behavior’ (MYS 721, 2348, 2722). An example of this 
in a poem that is primarily in phonetic script is below. 


MYS 3905 

遊内乃 ASWOBU UTI no In the garden where 

多努之吉庭尓 tanwosiki NIPA ni our festivity is joyous, if we 

梅柳 UMEYANAGWI were to break off sprigs of the plum 

乎理加謝思底婆 wori kazasiteba and willow to decorate our hair 

意毛比奈美可毛 omopinami kamo then we would leave no regrets. 

 

邪 


OJ: za OC: *la or *ja 

LH: zia EMC: zia GO: zia KN: sia 

NOM: tà SV: tà SK: sya, ya 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, and appears mainly in Kojiki and 
Man’yōshū. The famous usage appears in the names of the procreation duo, 
Izanagi (伊邪那岐) and Izanami (伊邪那美). It appears in other names like 牟 
邪臣 Muza OMI (KG), 春日之伊邪河宮 KASUGA NO IzaKAPA MIYA ‘the 
Kasuga Izakawa Palace’ (KG), and 袁邪本王 Prince Wozapo (KG). There is an 
interesting sentence stuffed into the mouth of Great King Ōjin, when he asks his 
two sons which is the dearer of two children, the older or the younger. Nintoku 
(Oposazaki) is quoted as saying the younger is dearer, at which point Ōjin says: 
佐邪岐。阿藝之言如我所思 sazaki, agi NO KOTO ZO WA GA OMOPU GA GOTOKO 
NARU ‘Sazaki, your words are precisely what I have been thinking.’ 

KK 43 

伊邪古杼母 iza kwodomo You children, 

怒毘流都美迩 nwobiru tumi ni let us go pick wild leeks— 

比流都美迩 piru tumi ni on the path that I travel 

和賀由久美知能 wa ga yuku miti no to pick leeks 

迦具波斯 kagupasi there was the fragrance 

波那多知婆那波 pana tatibana pa of the blossoms of the orange. 

本都延波 pwotuye pa In the upper branches birds have 

登理韋賀良斯 tori wigarasi nested and scattered them. 

志豆延波 siduye pa In the lower branches 

比登登理賀良斯 pito torigarasi people have picked them. 

美都具理能 mituguri no In the middle branches, 

那迦都延能 nakatuye no as the middle of three chestnuts, 

本都毛理 pwotumori there is a bud— 

阿加良袁登賣袁 akara wotomye wo a ruby of a maiden. 

伊邪佐佐婆 iza sasaba It would be well 

余良斯那 yorasi na if you made her your own. 

It is interesting to note that 邪 only appears three times in Man’yōshū, all in 
Book 13. 

MYS 3226 

沙邪禮浪 sazare NAMI The Hatsuse River 

浮而流 UKITE NAGARURU with the ripples 

長谷河 PATUSEGAPA that come floating down— 

可依礒之 YORU BEKI ISWO NO how forlorn that there is no 

無蚊不怜也 NAKIGA SABUSISA beach for our boat to approach. 

 


奢 


OJ: za OC: *lha 

LH: śa EMC: ɕia GO: sia KN: sia 

NOM: xa SV: xa SK: sya 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, and appears only in Kojiki. According to 
Ōno (1977:171–175), this phonogram is used a total of eight times in Kojiki to 
represent various toponyms and names. It also appears once in the poetry. The 
majority of examples of 奢 in Kojiki render the word iza ‘let’s do it’ (KG). 
There is also a somewhat obscure name 久比奢母智神 kupizamoti (KG). 

KK 38 

伊奢阿藝 iza agi Come on, you fellows, 

布流玖麻賀 purukuma ga rather than bear 

伊多弖淤波受波 itate opazu pa the wounds from Furukuma, 

迩本杼理能 nipodori no let us dive and hide 

阿布美能宇美迩 apumi no umi ni in the sea of Afumi, 

迦豆岐勢那和 kaduki senawa where the grebes are. 

 

蔵 


OJ: za OC: *dzâŋ 

LH: dzɑŋ EMC: dzaŋ GO: zau KN: sau 

NOM: tàng SV: tàng SK: cang 

Usage / History: 

I place this graph in the LJS. While this was a somewhat popular phonogram, 
appearing in Nihon shoki, Man’yōshū, Shōsōin documents and others, it does not 
appear to have been an early usage. The earliest usage I can find is to represent 
the toponym 武蔵 Muza(si). Note that Kujiki’s list of provinces has Muzasi 
written as 旡邪志, making one believe the name evolved thus: mun-sasi > 
muzasi. This likely is an old Ainu place name, perhaps meaning ‘grass fortress’ 
(cf. Bentley 2006:369, n. 43). There is no reason to have 武蔵 represent the 
trisyllabic name muzasi, so it is logical to assume this is a type of abbreviation. 
An examination of the evidence preserved on wooden documents shows that 
almost all examples of this toponym from Nara era digs have the digraph 武蔵. 
Only one example that I have found has 武蔵志 muzasi (MKK 19:12). However, 
there is one possibility, a tablet excavated from the old Fujiwara Captial (fl. 694– 
710), where a faint transcription seems to be 牟邪之 muzasi (MK 1238). This 
somewhat tenuous evidence suggests that the trisyllabic word was later 
represented by the digraph 武蔵, where 蔵 does not represent final -si, but 
suggests to the reader that it should be added. 

All but one example of 蔵 in Nihon shoki is used to represent muzasi. The 
single example appears in a poem: 

NSK 96 

倭例以梨魔志 ware irimasi I went inside 

阿都圖唎 atwo twori and held her leg, 

都麼怒唎絁底 tumadworisite holding the edge of her hem, 

魔倶囉圖唎 makura twori holding her pillow— 

伊慕我堤嗚 imo ga te wo holding my spouse. 

倭例儞魔柯斯毎 ware ni makasime I wrapped her hand 

倭我堤嗚麼 wa ga te woba around my waist 


伊慕儞魔柯絁毎 imo ni makasime and she my arm— 

麼左棄逗囉 masakwidura wrapped it around her. 

多々企阿藏播梨 tataki azapari And like a vine, 

矢洎矩矢慮 sisikusiro we caressed, intertwined. 

There are eight examples of 蔵 in Man’yōshū, all representing 武蔵 
Muzashi. 

 

社 


OJ: za OC: *daʔ 

LH: dźaʔ EMC: dʑia GO: zia KN: sia 

NOM: xã SV: xã SK: sya 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and was mainly used in toponyms and 
personal names. It appears twice in the annotational notes in Nihon shoki: 率川 
此云伊社箇波 “ ‘Iza River’ is read izagapa” (NSG). 

This phonogram appears twice in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 880 

阿麻社迦留 amazakaru Having lived five years 

比奈尓伊都等世 pina ni itutose in the countryside, 

周麻比都々 sumapitutu far from heaven, 

美夜故能提夫利 miyakwo no teburi I have competely forgotten 

和周良延尓家利 wasurayenikyeri the proper conduct of the capital. 

 

謝 


OJ: za OC: *s-lakh 

LH: ziah EMC: zia GO: zia KN: sia 

NOM: tạ SV: tạ SK: sya 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears in the imperial edicts of 
Shoku Nihongi: 天坐神地坐神乎祈祷奉。挂畏遠我皇天皇御世始弖拜仕奉利 
衆 人 乎 伊 謝 奈 比 率 弖 AME [NI] MASU KAMWI KUNI [NI] MASU KAMWI wo 
INORIMATURI, KAKEMAKU [MO] KASIKWOKI TOPOSUMYERAGI [NO] MIYO [WO] 
PAZIMETte, WOROGAMI TUKAPEMATUri, MOROBITO wo izanapi PIKIWIte ‘We 
implore the deities that reside in the heavens and the deities that reside in the 
earth, and from the beginning of the successive reigns of the distant ancestors of 
the imperial rulers, whose names we reverence too much to speak, our ruler 
reveres and worships (the Buddha) and invites and leads the masses to (the 
construction of the Rashana Buddha)...’ (SM 13). 

This phonogram also appears once in a toponym in Shoku Nihongi: 丹後國 
与謝郡 Tanigo Province Yoza District (776.8.28). This phonogram appears six 
times in Man’yōshū, five of which appear in the poetry. The single example 
outside of the poetry is the name: 譽謝女王 Princess Yoza (MYS 59). 

MYS 846 

可須美多都 kasumi tatu Mist rises on this 

那我岐波流卑乎 nagaki parupi wo long spring day— 

可謝勢例杼 kazaseredo I have stuck a sprig of 

伊野那都可子岐 iya natukasiki plum blossom in my hair, but 

烏梅能波那可毛 ume no pana kamo how I long for those plums. 

 


座 


OJ: za OC: *dzôiʔ 

LH: dzuɑiʔ EMC: dzwa GO: za KN: sa 

NOM: toà SV: toà SK: cwa 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 434 

加座皤夜能 kazapaya no The white azaleas 

美保乃浦廻之 mipo no URAMWI NO on the coastline of 

白管仕 SIRATUTUzi Miho with swift winds— 

見十方不怜 MIREDOMO SABUSI I still feel empty, thinking of 

無人念者 NAKI PITO OMOPEBA the person who is no longer here. 

 

奘 


OJ: za OC: *dzaŋh 

LH: dẓɑŋh EMC: tʂɨaŋ LMC: tʂa:ŋ GO: zau KN: sau 

NOM: NA SV: tảng SK: cang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. The phonogram 奘 only appears in 
Nihon shoki, appearing once in the annotational notes, and three times in the 
poetry. Beside these, it is mainly used in the names of the two procreating deities: 
伊奘諾尊 izanaki [NO] MIKOTO and 伊奘冉尊 izanami [NO] MIKOTO (NSG). 
The annotational note is: 去來、此云伊奘 “ ‘Shall we?’ is read iza” (NSG). 

NSK 60 

破夜歩佐波 payabusa pa The quick falcon 

阿梅珥能朋利 ame ni nobori climbs into the sky 

等弭箇慨梨 tobikakeri and soars overhead. 

伊菟岐餓宇倍能 ituki ga upe no Dive down and capture the wren 

裟奘岐等羅佐泥 kazaki torasane that is upon the sacred place. 

 

裝 


OJ: za OC: *dzaŋh 

LH: dẓɑŋh EMC: tʂɨaŋ LMC: tʂa:ŋ GO: siau KN: sau 

NOM: trang SV: trang SK: cang 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears three times in Nihon shoki 
poetry. 

NSK 28 

烏智箇多能 wotikata no In the direction 

阿邏々麻菟麼邏 arara matubara of the thinly wooded pine grove, 

摩菟麼邏珥 matubara ni we will venture 

和多利喩祇氐 watari yukite across that pine grove. 

菟區喩彌珥 tukuyumi ni Using zelkova bows with 

末利椰塢多具陪 mariya wo tagupe sounding arrowhead arrows, 

宇摩比等破 umapito pa those of noble birth 

于摩譬苔奴知野 umapito dwoti ya will fight with their own kind. 

伊徒姑播茂 itwokwo pa mo Men with relatives 

伊徒姑奴池 itwokwo dwoti will fight together. 

伊裝阿波那 iza apana Commence the battle, 

和例波 ware pa shall we? 


多摩岐波屢 tamaki paru Minister Uti, 

于池能阿層餓 uti no aso ga possessing a strong spirit, 

波邏濃知波 paranuti pa does not have a stomach 

異佐誤阿例椰 isagwo are ya made of pebbles. 

伊裝阿波那 iza apana Commence the battle, 

和例波 ware pa shall we? 

 

蹔 


OJ: zami OC: NA 

LH: NA EMC: dzam GO: zamu KN: samu 

NOM: NA SV: tạm SK: cam 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears only in Nihon shoki in the 
toponym 和蹔 wazami. 

 

是 


OJ: ze OC: *deʔ 

LH: dźeʔ EMC: źjeʔ GO: ze KN: se 

NOM: thị SV: thị SK: si 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It would appear that Kojiki may have 
been one of the first documents to make a distinction between se and ze, as the 
latter was fairly rare. Earlier writers likely felt that context made the distinction 
sufficiently clear. This graph appears four times in Kojiki. One example appears 
below: 

KK 51 

知波夜比登 tipaya pito Very powerful those people 

宇遲能和多理迩 udi no watari ni at the ferry of Uji 

和多理是邇 watarize ni at the shallows of the river 

多弖流 tateru where stands bow material: 

阿豆佐由美麻由美 adusayumi mayumi the zelkova and catalpa trees. 

伊岐良牟登 ikiramu to To cut down those trees 

許許呂波母閇杼 kokoto pa mopedo I had thought in my heart— 

伊斗良牟登 itworamu to to hold those trees 

許許呂波母閇杼 kokoro pa modedo I had thought in my heart, 

母登幣波 motope pa but at the base 

岐美袁於母比傳 kimi wo omopide I recalled my Lord. 

This graph also appears 28 times in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 799 

大野山 OPONWO YAMA Mist spreads out over 

紀利多知和多流 kwiri tatiwataru the entire face of Mount Ōno. 

和何那宜久 wa ga nageku Mist spreads out, 

於伎蘇乃可是尓 okiswo no kaze carried by the wind from 

紀利多知和多流 kwiri tatiwataru the breath of my lament. 

 

筮 


OJ: ze OC: *dats 

LH: dźas EMC: źjäih LMC: ʂɦiaj GO: ze KN: sei 

NOM: vầu SV: phệ SK: sye 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This graph only appears in Nihon shoki 
poetry: 

NSK 8 

伽牟伽筮能 kamukaze no On the large boulder 

伊齊能于瀰能 ise no umi no by the sea of Ise, 

於費異之珥夜 opoisi ni ya swept by divine winds— 

異波臂茂等倍屢 ipapimotopori the sea snails crawl about: 

之多儾瀰能 sitadami no the perwinkle. 

 

噬 


OJ: ze OC: *dats 

LH: dźas EMC: źjäih LMC: ʂɦiaj GO: ze KN: sei 

NOM: phệ, phè, thĩ SV: thệ SK: sye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears once in the poetry of Nihon 
shoki: 

NSK 78 

柯武柯噬能 kamukaze no By the divine-wind swept ocean 

伊制能 ise no of Ise Province, 

伊制能奴能 ise no nwo no on a plain in Ise, 

娑柯曳嗚 sakaye wo a man cuts the branches 

伊裒甫流柯枳底 ipo puru kakite that have grown so thickly. 

 

自 


OJ: zi OC: *dzih 

LH: dzih EMC: dzi GO: zi KN: si 

NOM: tự, từ SV: tự SK: co 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the PBS. This phonogram appears on the 
Namsan stele, in what appears to be a fragment of a name: □自叱兮 *X-dzitshit-
gəi. This phonogram also appears in several quotes from Paekche records 
preserved in Nihon shoki. Below are three examples of names or words from 
these Paekche quotes: 達率自斯 Tal-syu Zisi, 牟自毛礼 Muzi Mwore, 久須 
尼自利 Kusu Neziri. 

This phonogram is also found in the Suiko era corpus, as these two examples 
show: 伊自牟良君 izimura KIMI Princess Ijimura (Jōgūki fragment), and 刀自 
古 郎 女 twozikwo IRATUMYE Princess Tojiko (Shōtoku genealogy). This 
phonogram also appears on a number of excavated tablets: 下毛野国足利郡波 
自可里鮎大贄一古参年十月廿二日 ‘On the twenty second day of the tenth 
month of the third year (703) one basket of trout was presented for the Great First 
Fruits Festival, from Pazika Village in ASIKAGA District of Lower KENWO 
Province’ (MK 3), 秦刀自女 PATA Twozimye (MK 858), and a fragment of 
text: 可奈□自阿佐□□己之乎□久利之自□理利□須利女 kanaXzi asa 
XXkosi wo Xkuri sizi X KOTOWAri XsuriMYE (MK 1111). My translation is based 
on assumptions according to the grammar, so the following rendition and 
translation are very tentative. Assumed readings are underlined: kanapazi asa 
podokosi wo kakuri sizi ni KOTOWARrite suriMYE… “I hid my unexpected 
morning performance, judging it profusely, and Surimye….” 


This phonogram is also used in Kojiki, not in the poetry, but in place names 
which perhaps reflects an older usage: 伊自牟国造 izimu [NO] KUNI [NO] 
MIYATUKWO ‘Governor of Ijimu’ (KG), and 志自牟 sizimu, a man named 
Shijimu (KG). 

This phonogram is used fairly extensively in Man’yōshū to represent zi. 

MYS 849 

能許利多留 nokoritaru The plum blossoms 

由棄仁末自例留 yuki ni mazireru that have mingled with 

宇梅能半奈 ume no pana the enduring snow— 

半也久奈知利曽 payaku na tiri so Do not be in a hurry to scatter. 

由吉波氣奴等勿 yuki pa kenu tomo Even if the snow should melt. 

 

士 


OJ: zi OC: *dzrəʔ 

LH: dẓəʔ EMC: dʑɨ GO: zi KN: si 

NOM: sĩ, SV: sĩ SK: so 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. It is used in Kojiki, representing the verb 
根許士爾許士 nekozi ni kozi ‘pull up the root by the root’ (KG). An excavated 
bamboo tablet contains the following fragment dug up from the Fujiwara Palace 
(fl. 694–710): 十人刀士 TOWO [AMARI NO] PITO twozi ‘ten women folk’ (MK 
6081). 

This phonogram appears in Nihon shoki in the word 牟士那 muzina 
‘raccoon dog’ (NSG). The phonogram also appears twice in Nihon shoki poetry: 

NSK 58 

菟藝泥赴 tuginepu This woman of 

夜莽之呂謎能 yamasiromye no Yamashiro, thick with trees, 

許玖波茂知 kokupa moti dug up a large radish 

于智辭於朋泥 utisi opone with a wooden hoe. 

泥士漏能 nezirwo no Those arms of hers, 

辭漏多娜武枳 sirwotadamuki white like the large radish— 

摩箇儒鷄麼虚曾 makazukyeba koso you could say you knew me not 

辭羅儒等茂伊波梅 sirazu tomo ipame if we had never lay intertwined. 

This phonogram appears once in the edicts preserved in Shoku Nihongi: 所 
思坐而我皇太上天皇大前尓恐古士物進退匍匐廻保理白賜比 WA GA OPOKIMI 
OPOKI SUMYERA MIKOTO [NO] OPOMAPYE ni KASIkwozi MONO SIZIMAPI PARABAPI 
MOTOpori MAWOSI TAMApi ‘We tremble in awe before our Queen Dowager, and 
advance and retire as if crawling on the ground, and ask of her…’ (SM 6). This 
phonogram likely fell out of use in the Nara era because of its prominent use in 
many Chinese titles: 博士 ‘doctor,’ 兵士 ‘soldier,’ and 右衛士 ‘palace guard 
of the right.’ 

 

盡 


OJ: zi OC: *dzinʔ 

LH: dzinʔ or dzinh EMC: dzin GO: zimu KN: sin 

NOM: tận, hết SV: tận SK: cin 

Usage / History: 

Examples of this phonogram used to write zi are quite rare, and as far as I can 
tell, only used to render one place name. Because of this, I tentatively place this 


in the EJS, on the assumption that renderings of toponyms are resistant to change. 
Examples with the graph 盡 appear rarely in both Man’yōshū and Nihon shoki. 
All examples represent the place name puzi (Fuji) as 不盡. 

 

茲 


OJ: zi OC: *tsə 

LH: tsiə EMC: tsɨ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: NA SV: ti, tư SK: co 

Usage / History: 

See the same phonogram under si. 

 

慈 


OJ: zi OC: *dzə 

LH: dziə EMC: dzɨ GO: si KN: si 

NOM: từ SV: từ SK: co 

Usage / History: 

It is difficult to chronologically place this phonogram, but extant textual 
evidence leads me to place it in the LJS. The earliest examples of this graph 
appear in early Nara texts, for example the rendition of 久慈 kuzi ‘Kuji District’ 
appears in both Man’yōshū and other documents. Almost all extant examples of 
慈 are used to write Kuji, which means this was a set spelling, and likely 
predates the late Asuka or early Nara eras. On this evidence it is tempting to 
place the graph in the EJS. There is also a personal name in Nihon shoki, 櫻井臣 
和慈古 SAKURAWI OMI Wazikwo, which appears in the record of Jomei, and 
lends some evidence that this phonogram may date back to the EJS. With such 
little evidence it is difficult to date, so I tentatively place it in the LJS. 

 

時 


OJ: zi OC: *də or *dəʔ 

LH: dźə EMC: dzɨ GO: zi KN: si 

NOM: thì, thìa, thời SV: thì, thời SK: si 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only in Man’yōshū, where it 
is used three times. 

MYS 997 

住吉乃 SUMINOYE no Like the corbicula on 

粉濱之四時美 KWOPAMA NO sizimi Kohama in Suminoe, 

開藻不見 AKE MO MIZU will I continue to yearn 

隠耳哉 KOMORITE NOMWI YA only in secret without 

戀度南 KWOPWI WATARUnamu even opening up to you? 

 

仕 


OJ: zi OC: *dzrəʔ 

LH: dẓəʔ EMC: dzɨ GO: zi KN: si 

NOM: sĩ SV: sĩ SK: so 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only in Man’yōshū, where it 
is used three times. 

MYS 434 

加座皤夜能 kazapaya no The white azaleas 

美保乃浦廻之 mipo no URAMWI NO on the coastline of 


白管仕 SIRATUTUzi Miho with swift winds— 

見十方不怜 MIREDOMO SABUSI I still feel empty, thinking of 

無人念者 NAKI PITO OMOPEBA the person who is no longer here. 

 

寺 


OJ: zi OC: *s-ləh 

LH: ziəh EMC: zɨ LMC: sɦʑ GO: zi KN: si 

NOM: chùa SV: tự SK: so, si 

Usage / History: 

See the same phonogram under si. 

 

珥 


OJ: zi OC: *nəh 

LH: ńəh EMC: ɲɨ LMC: riˋ GO: ni KN: zi 

NOM: nhẹ SV: nhị SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears five times in the poetry of 
Nihon shoki. 

NSK 124 

于知波志能 utipasi no Come out, child 

都梅能阿素弭爾 tume no aswobi ni to play at the edge of 

伊提麻栖古 idemase kwo the plank bridge. 

多麻提能伊鞞能 tamade no ipye no Mistress Yaheko of 

野鞞古能度珥 yapyekwo no twozi the Tamade House. 

伊提麻志能 idemasi no There will be no regrets 

倶伊播阿羅珥茹 kui pa arazi zo if you come out. 

伊提麻西古 idemase kwo Come out, child— 

多麻提能鞞能 tamade no ipye no Mistress Yaheko of 

野鞞古能度珥 yapyekwo no twozi the Tamade House. 

 

茸 


OJ: zi OC: *noŋ 

LH: ńoŋ EMC: ɲuawŋ LMC: rywŋ GO: niou KN: ziou 

NOM: nhung SV: nhung SK: ywong 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears only twice in Nihon shoki, 
both times in the annotational notes: 不負於族此云宇我邏磨悶茸 “ ‘I will not 
lose to a relative’ is read ugara makezi” (NSG), 梔此云波茸 “ ‘Wax tree’ is 
read pazi” (NSG). 

 

餌 


OJ: zi OC: *nəh 

LH: ńəh EMC: ɲɨ LMC: riˋ GO: ni KN: zi 

NOM: NA SV: nhĩ, nhị SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears three times in Nihon shoki. 
Two examples from annotational notes are: 手抉此云多衢餌離 “ ‘Hand-scoop’ 
is read takuziri” (NSG), 倉下此云衢羅餌 “The name 倉下 is read kurazi” 
(NSG). There is one example in the poetry: 


NSK 14 

瀰都瀰都志 mitumitusi You, the intrepid 

倶梅能故邏餓 kume no kwora ga sons of the Kume— 

介耆茂等珥 kakimoto ni ginger is growing 

宇惠志破餌介瀰 uwesi pazikami under the fence of our land. 

句致弭比倶 kuti pipiku As I will not forget 

和例破涴輸例儒 ware pa wasurezu the sharp taste of that ginger 

于智弖之夜莽務 utitesi yamamu we will utterly smite the enemy. 

 

耳 


OJ: zi OC: *nəʔ 

LH: ńəʔ EMC: ɲɨ LMC: riˋ GO: ni KN: zi 

NOM: nhải, nhãi, nhĩ SV: nhĩ SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS. It appears once in the poetry in Nihon 
shoki: 

NSK 90 

飫裒枳瀰能 opokimi no Though the great lord 

耶陛能矩瀰哿枳 yapye no kumikaki desires to weave together 

哿々梅騰謀 kakamedomo a multi-layer fence of branches, 

儺鳴阿摩之耳彌 na wo amasizimi you will not weave the branches 

哿々農倶彌柯枳 kakanu kumikaki and there will be no fence. 

The proper interpretation of the above stanza is in doubt, because amasizimi 
is of unknown meaning. Some scholars wonder if this is word is a form derived 
ultimately from arumasizimi, with -r-loss that often occurs before a high vowel 
giving amasizimi. If that interpretation is correct, then the meaning would be 
‘you should not be here.’ I have tentatively interpreted this as a form of amu ‘to 
weave.’ 

 

貳 


OJ: zi OC: *nis or *nih 

LH: ńis or ńih EMC: ɲi LMC: riˋ GO: ni KN: zi 

NOM: nhẹ, nhì, SV: nhị SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to CBS. It appears once in Nihon shoki poetry: 

NSK 95 

婀嗚儞與志 awo ni yosi In the valley of 

乃樂能婆娑摩儞 nara no pasama ni the blue hills of Nara, 

斯々貳暮能 sisizi mono like beasts of prey, he lies 

瀰豆矩陛御暮梨 miduku pyegomori hidden by the banks— 

瀰儺曾々矩 mina sosoku a large catch of tuna, 

思寐能和倶吾嗚 sibi no wakugwo wo the young man, Shibi. 

阿娑理逗那偉能古 asaridunawi no kwo Boars, do not try to find him! 

 

兒 


OJ: zi OC: *nje 

LH: ńe EMC: ɲiə LMC: ri GO: ni, gei KN: zi 

NOM: nhi SV: nhi SK: yey, o 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears only once in Nihon shok, in 
the poetry: 

NSK 125 

多致播那播 tatibana pa The fruit of the orange tree 

於能我曳多々々 ono ga yeda yeda grows each on its own branch, 

那例々騰母 nareredomo but when these are strung 

陀麻爾農矩騰岐 tama ni nuk toki together as jewels they are 

於野兒弘儞農倶 oyazi wo ni nuku strung on the same cord. 

It should be mentioned that Nom preserves an older reading of nhè with the 
graph 唲, thus underscoring the reading of gei and the Later Han reading of ńe. 

 

爾 


OJ: zi OC: *neʔ 

LH: ńeʔ EMC: ɲiə LMC: riˊ GO: ni KN: zi 

NOM: nhải, nhãi SV: nhĩ SK: i 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, and appears only once in Nihon shoki, 
in the annotational notes. I group this in the CBS because 爾 is one of the main 
graphs used to transcribe ni (see 爾 under ni). Thus, this graph transcribes zi 
because of a later change in Chinese phonology. Consider the sole example in 
Shoki: 立於浮渚在平處此云羽企爾磨梨陁毘邏而陁陁志 “The graphs 
‘standing on the flat area of the flowing island’ are read ukizima ri tapira ni 
tatasi” (NSG). Thus, ‘on the floating island’ is written 羽企爾磨梨 and 
represents uki ‘floating’ zima ‘island’ (a)ri ‘to be.’ 

 

下 


OJ: zi OC: *ɡrâʔ 

LH: ɡaʔ EMC: ɣaɨ > ɣɛ: GO: ge KN: ka 

NOM: hạ SV: há, hạ SK: ha 

Usage / History: 

The usage of this character to represent OJ zi is very interesting. Clearly this 
usage has nothing to do with the underlying phonetics of the graph, because the 
graph transcribes a voiced fricative, but the Chinese has a velar. 

Thus, I conclude that this is a kungana. This graph must represent OJ si 
‘down, below.’ Because the examples with 下 always undergo sequential 
voicing, the rendition is always zi. The best example of 下 for zi is in the name 
高倉下 TAKA KURAZI. Perhaps because the compilers thought the reading 
was somewhat counterintuitive, a gloss was added: 衢羅餌 kurazi. 

 

深 


OJ: zimi OC: *nhəm 

LH: tśim or śim EMC: ɕim GO: simu KN: simu 

NOM: thẳm, thằm SV: thâm SK: sim 

Usage / History: 

The usage of this phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears only Harima 
fudoki in the toponym 志深 sizimi Shijimi. 

 


甚 


OJ: zimi OC: *dəmʔ or *dəms 

LH: dźimʔ or dźimh EMC: dʑim GO: zimu KN: simu 

NOM: thậm SV: thầm SK: sim 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears in the toponym 伊甚 izimi 
Ijimi, word appearing four times in Nihon shoki, and several times also in Kujiki. 

 

敍 


OJ: zo OC: *s-laʔ 

LH: ziɑʔ EMC: zjwoʔ GO: zio KN: sio 

NOM: tự SV: tự SK: sye 

Usage / History: 

This is one of the few phonograms for zo, the voiced counterpart of so. It 
would appear from the available data that originally the early scribes did not 
make an attempt to represent the prenasalized counterpart. This may have been 
because the prenasalized fricative was rare. 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS. Consider the following examples from 
Kojiki: 

KK 44 

美豆多麻流 midutamaru Those who pound the stakes 

余佐美能伊氣能 yosami no ike no into the dike at Yosami Pond 

韋具比宇知 wigupi uti where water is dammed up 

比斯賀良能 pisigara no do not know that someone else 

佐斯祁流斯良迩 sasikyeru sirani has already stucks stakes in. 

奴那波久理 nunapa kuri Those who gather pond rope 

波閇祁久斯良迩 papekyeku sirani do not know others have taken it. 

和賀許許呂志敍 wa ga kokoro zo It is my own heart 

伊夜袁許迩斯弖 iya woko ni site that has been so foolish. 

伊麻敍久夜斯岐 ima zo kuyasiki Now I am irritated. 

This phonogram appears once in the poetry of Nihon shoki: 

NSK 38 

彌知能之利 miti no siri This maiden from 

古波儾塢等綿 kwopada wotomye Kohada behind the road 

阿羅素破儒 araswopazu is wonderful, 

泥辞区塢之敍 nesiku wo si zo for she has lain with me 

于蘆波辭彌茂布 urupasimi mopu offering no resistance. 

All five examples of 敍 in Man’yōshū represent the emphatic particle zo: 

MYS 219 

天數 SWORA KAZWOPU Counting in my head 

凡津子之 OPOTU NO KWO GA I vaguely looked at the maiden 

相日 APISI PI NI from the indefinite port 

於保尓見敷者 opo ni MISIKU PA on the day we met, 

今敍悔 IMA zo KUYASIKI but now, how vexing it is. 

 

存 


OJ: zo OC: *dzə̂ n 

LH: dzən EMC: dzwən GO: zomu KN: son 

NOM: tồn SV: tồn SK: cwon 


Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, and appears once in Kojiki: 

KK 78 

阿志比紀能 asipikwi no Weary from climbing 

夜麻陀袁豆久理 yamada wo tukuri I cultivated mountain land. 

夜麻陀加美 yamadakami The mountain being high 

斯多備袁和志勢 sitabwi wo wasise I buried irrigation pipes. 

志多杼比爾 sitadopi ni Buried, I snuck to see 

和賀登布伊毛袁 wa ga topu imwo wo my beloved who asked of me. 

斯多那岐爾 sita naki ni Thus I cry to myself. 

和賀那久都麻袁 wa ga naku tuma wo I weep for my spouse— 

許存許曾波 kozo koso pa it will be tonight 

夜須久波陀布禮 yasuku pada pure that I will gently touch her skin. 

 

賊 


OJ: zo OC: *dzə̂ k 

LH: dzək EMC: dzek LMC: tsɦəăk GO: zoku KN: soku 

NOM: tặc SV: tặc SK: cuk, cek 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 150 

吾戀 A GA KWOPURU My lord who I long for, 

君曽伎賊乃夜 KIMI so kizo no YWO you visited me 

夢所見鶴 IME NI MIYETURU last night in a dream. 

 

序 


OJ: zo OC: s-laʔ 

LH: ziɑʔ EMC: zjwoʔ LMC: sɦiə GO: zio KN: sio 

NOM: tựa SV: tự SK: sye 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears once in the poetry of Nihon 
shoki, and eight times in Man’yōshū. 

NSK 50 

阿佐豆磨能 asaduma no It is good, however, 

避介能烏瑳介烏 pika no wosaka wo to have a companion 

介多那耆珥 katanaki ni when one is sobbing deeply 

瀰致喩區茂能茂 miti yuku mono mo as she walks along Hika Knoll 

多遇譬氐序豫枳 tagupite zo yoki in Asazuma. 

Interestingly all examples of 序 in Man’yōshū are confined to Books 10, 11, 
12, and 13. 

MYS 2019 

自古 INISIPYE YU A year has come and gone 

擧而之服 AGETESI PATA MO and I did not even look back 

不顧 KAPYERIMIZU at the loom that was set up 

天河津尓 AMA NO KAPADU ni from long ago. I have been here 

年序經去来 TOSI zo PENIKYERU at the port to the river of heaven. 

 


鋤 


OJ: zo OC: *dzra 

LH: dẓɑ EMC: dẓjwo LMC: tʂɦuə GO: zio KN: sio 

NOM: sừ, xừ SV: sừ SK: cwo 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears once in the poetry in Nihon 
shoki: 

NSK 70 

於裒企彌烏 opokimi wo They exiled the great ruler 

志摩珥波夫利 sima ni paburi to a distant island. 

布儺阿摩利 punaamari The boat will be full, 

異餓幣利去牟鋤 igapyeri komu zo and she will return to me. 

和餓哆々瀰由梅 wa ga tatami yume So purify all the mats. 

去等烏許曾 koto wo koso ‘The mats’ are my words, 

哆多瀰等異泮梅 tatami to ipame but that is not what I meant. 

和餓菟摩烏由梅 wa ga tuma wo yume Stay clean and pure, my spouse. 

 

鐏 


OJ: zo OC: dzûns 

LH: dzuənh EMC: dzwənh LMC: tsɦun GO: zon KN: son 

NOM: NA SV: tốn SK: cwun 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram should belong to the LJS, as it only appears in Nihon shoki, 
but as it clearly represents zo. It only appears once in the poetry of Shoki. 

NSK 69 

和餓儺勾菟摩 wa ga naku tuma I cry for my spouse. 

去鐏去曾 kozo koso It was last night 

椰主區泮娜布例 yasuku pada pure that our flesh calmly touched. 

 

茹 


OJ: zo OC: *naʔ or *nah 

LH: ńɑʔ or ńɑh EMC: ńźjwo LMC: riə GO: nio KN: zio 

NOM: nhự,, nhà, nhựa SV: như, nhự, nhữ SK: ye 

Usage / History: 

This graph belongs to the CBS. It appears twice in the poetry of Nihon shoki 
poetry. Below is one example: 

NSK 89 

飫裒陁㨖嗚 opotati wo Though I stand here 

多黎播枳多㨖氐 tarepakitatite girded with a large sword, 

農哿儒登慕 nukazu tomo I intend to fulfill 

須衞娑陀志氐謀 suwe patasite mo my desire and meet her— 

阿波夢登茹於謀賦 apamu to zo omopu without drawing my sword. 

 

受 


OJ: zu OC: *duʔ 

LH: dźuʔ EMC: źjəu GO: ziu KN: siu 

NOM: thụ SV: thọ, thụ SK: sywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the EJS, and is the oldest known phonogram used 
to represent OJ zu. The phonogram is used in Kojiki, as the following examples 
illustrate: 天宇受売 the deity AME Uzumye, 伊須受能宮 isuzu no MIYA 


‘Isuzu Palace,’ and 美夜受比売 Miyazu Pimye. It also appears in the following 
song: 

KK 37 

波麻都知登理 pamatutidori Plovers of the beach 

波麻用波由迦受 pama ywo pa yukazu do not travel from the beach. 

伊蘇豆多布 iswodutapu They send from the rocky shore. 

This phonogram is also used in Nihon shoki and Man’yōshū. In Nihon shoki, 
the phonogram 受 is used only once in the annotational notes, and twice in the 
poetry: 假庪 此云佐受枳 “ ‘Cupboard’ is read sazuki” (NSG). 

NSK 66 

佐瑳羅餓多 sasaragata Undo the string with 

邇之枳能臂毛弘 nisiki no pimwo wo the bamboo whisk design— 

等枳舍氣帝 tokisakyete that brocade string. 

阿麻多絆泥受邇 amata pa nezu ni I cannot spend many nights; 

多儾比等用能未 tada pitoywo nomwi let us spend but one night. 

The phonogram 受 is the main graph used to render OJ zu in Man’yōshū, 
appearing roughly 200 times in the anthology. 

MYS 22 

河上乃 KAPA NO PE no On the sacred cluster of 

湯津盤村二 YUTU IPAMURA ni boulders upriver grass 

草武左受 KUSA musazu does not grow. I wish they 

常丹毛冀名 TUNE NImo GAMO NA could forever remain thus. 

常處女煮手 TUNE WOTOMYE NITE Forever like a young maiden. 

 

授 


OJ: zu OC: *duh 

LH: dźuh EMC: źjəuh GO: ziu KN: siu 

NOM: thụ, thò SV: thọ, thụ SK: sywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and is used once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 4130 

波利夫久路 paribukurwo While I continue to wear 

應婢都々氣奈我良 obitutukyenagara the bag of needles and 

佐刀其等邇 satwogoto ni have walked from village to 

天良佐比安流氣騰 terasapi arukyedo village flashing it as I go 

比等毛登賀米授 pito mo togamezu not a person has criticized me. 

 

殊 


OJ: zu OC: *do 

LH: dźo EMC: źju GO: ziu KN: siu 

NOM: thùa SV: thù SK: sywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. It appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 864 

於久礼為天 okure wite Rather than being left behind 

那我古飛世殊波 nagakwopwi sezu pa with a long yearning, 

弥曽能不乃 misonopu no how I would like 

于梅能波奈尓忘 ume no pana nimo to be even a plum blossom 

奈良麻之母能乎 naramasi mono wo in the august garden. 


聚 


OJ: zu OC: *dzoʔ, *dzoh 

LH: dzioʔ, dzioh EMC: dzjuʔ, dzjuh GO: ziu KN: siu 

NOM: tụ SV: tụ SK: chywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS, and appears once in Man’yōshū. 

MYS 3229 

五十串立 IGUSI TATE When I look at the hair decoration 

神酒座奉 MIWA SUWEMATURU of the Shintō priest who sets up 

神主部之 PAPURIBYE GA the holy skewer, and prepares 

雲聚玉蔭 uzu TAMAKAGE and presents the holy wine, 

見者乏文 MIREBA TOMOSImo how my heart is drawn to him. 

 

儒 


OJ: zu OC: *no 

LH: ńo EMC: ńźju LMC: ryə GO: niu KN: ziu 

NOM: nho, nhô, nhua SV: nho, nhu SK: ywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS, used in Nihon shoki. This graph 
appears 17 times in the poetry. Below is one example. 

NSK 89 

飫裒陁㨖嗚 opotati wo Though I stand here 

多黎播枳多治氐 tarepakitatite girded with a large sword, 

農哿儒登慕 nukazu tomo I intend to fulfill 

須衞娑陀志氐謀 suwe patasite mo my desire and meet her— 

阿波夢登茹於謀賦 apamu tozo omopu without drawing my sword. 

 

孺 


OJ: zu OC: *noh 

LH: ńoh EMC: ńźjuh LMC: ryə GO: niu KN: ziu 

NOM: nhú, nhọ SV: nhụ SK: ywu 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the CBS and only appears in Nihon shoki. It 
appears twice in the annotational notes, and 12 times in the poetry: 髻花、此云 
于孺 “ ‘hair flowers (as ornaments)’ are known as uzu” (NSG). 

NSK 111 

烏麼野始儞 wobayasi ni Pulling me into the grove 

倭例烏比岐例底 ware wo pikirete I know not which person 

制始比騰能 sesi pito no did it to me— 

於謀提母始羅孺 omote mo sirazu I know not the face, 

伊弊母始羅孺母 ipye mo sirazu mo nor even his home. 

 

俗 


OJ: zwo OC: *s-lok 

LH: ziok EMC: zjwok GO: zoku KN: sioku 

NOM: tục, thói SV: tục SK: sywok 

Usage / History: 

This phonogram belongs to the LJS. This is the only clear usage for zwo in 
the ancient Japanese corpus. It is interesting that neither Kojiki nor Nihon shoki 
have any clear examples of zwo. Rather than claim that this prenasalized syllable 


did not exist in early Old Japanese, it is perhaps better to claim that it was rare, 
and the voiceless counterpart was multitasked. 

One example of this phonogram is found in Man’yōshū: 

MYS 890 

出弖由伎斯 IDEte yukisi While counting the days 

日乎可俗閇都都 PI wo kazwope tutu since I left home, 

家布々々等 kyepu kyepu to today, it will be today! 

阿袁麻多周良武 a wo matasuramu father and mother say 

知々波々良波母 titi papara pa mo who are surely waiting for me. 


559 
CHART OF PHONOGRAMS AND WHERE EACH APPEARS 
The top row is a list of sources, arranged chronologically. The left column is each 
phonogram, arranged alphabetically. 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
A 
阿 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
安 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
婀 ○ 
鞅 ○ 
吾 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
足 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
嗚呼 ○ 
AGA 
英 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
AKU 
惡 ○ ○ 
AMA 
菴 ○ 
奄 ○ 
AMU 
闇 ○ 
APA 
鴨 ○ 
API 
姶 ○ 
AYU 
愛 ○ ○ 
BA 
婆 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
伐 ○ 
麼 ○ 
魔 ○ 
磨 ○ 
薄 ○ 
BE 
倍 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
陪 ○ ○ ○ 
毎 ○ 
BI 
鼻 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
毘 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
婢 ○ ○ 
560 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
彌 ○ 
寐 ○ 
弭 ○ 
妣 ○ 
BO 
煩 ○ ○ ○ 
BU 
夫 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
扶 ○ ○ 
部 ○ ○ ○ 
父 ○ ○ ○ 
府 ○ 
歩 ○ 
矛 ○ 
符 ○ 
鶩 ○ 
蜂音 ○ 
BWI 
備 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
媚 ○ 
眉 ○ 
縻 ○ 
BYE 
婢 ○ 
謎 ○ 
部 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
DA 
大 ○ ○ 
太 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
陁 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
騨 ○ ○ ○ 
娜 ○ 
嚢 ○ 
儴 ○ 
DAMI 
談 ○ 
DANI 
騨 ○ 
DE 
傳 ○ 
殿 ○ 
代 ○ ○ ○ 
堤 ○ ○ 
提 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
561 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
低 ○ 
田 ○ 
弟 ○ 
泥 ○ ○ 
埿 ○ ○ 
涅 ○ 
耐 ○ 
DI 
遲 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
治 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
地 ○ ○ ○ 
尼 ○ 
泥 ○ 
旎 ○ 
膩 ○ 
道 ○ ○ ○ 
路 ○ 
DO 
縢 ○ ○ ○ 
杼 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
藤 ○ 
特 ○ 
耐 ○ 
迺 ○ 
DU 
頭 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
豆 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
逗 ○ 
圖 ○ 
弩 ○ 
砮 ○ 
DUMI 
曇 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
DWO 
土 ○ ○ ○ 
度 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
渡 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
奴 ○ 
怒 ○ 
E 
衣 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
愛 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
亞 ○ ○ 
依 ○ ○ ○ 
562 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
哀 ○ 
埃 ○ 
榎 ○ ○ ○ 
荏 ○ ○ ○ 
得 ○ 
朴 ○ 
可愛 ○ 
GA 
我 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
奇 ○ ○ 
宜 ○ 
賀 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
何 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
河 ○ ○ 
蛾 ○ 
餓 ○ 
峨 ○ 
俄 ○ 
鵝 ○ 
GE 
義 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
宜 ○ ○ ○ 
礙 ○ ○ 
碍 ○ 
㝵 ○ 
皚 ○ 
GI 
祇 ○ ○ ○ 
藝 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
儀 ○ 
蟻 ○ 
𡺸 ○ 
GO 
其 ○ ○ ○ 
期 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
碁 ○ ○ ○ 
凝 ○ 
語 ○ 
馭 ○ 
御 ○ 
GU 
具 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
吾 ○ 
遇 ○ ○ 
563 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
愚 ○ 
娯 ○ 
求 ○ 
隅 ○ 
愚 ○ 
虞 ○ 
GURI 
群 ○ 
GWI 
疑 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
宜 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
義 ○ 
擬 ○ 
GWO 
吾 ○ ○ ○ 
胡 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
候 ○ ○ ○ 
後 ○ ○ ○ 
虞 ○ 
誤 ○ 
呉 ○ ○ 
悟 ○ 
GYE 
下 ○ ○ 
牙 ○ ○ 
介 ○ 
雅 ○ 
夏 ○ 
霓 ○ 
I 
伊 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
夷 ○ ○ ○ 
移 ○ ○ 
已 ○ 
異 ○ ○ 
以 ○ ○ 
怡 ○ 
易 ○ 
射 ○ ○ 
五 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
膽 ○ 
馬聲 ○ 
INA 
因 ○ 
564 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
INI 
印 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
IPI 
揖 ○ 
ITI 
壹 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
KA 
加 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
居 ○ ○ 
迦 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
奇 ○ ○ 
可 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
訶 ○ ○ ○ 
哥 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
介 ○ 
哿 ○ ○ ○ 
珂 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
箇 ○ ○ 
嘉 ○ ○ ○ 
架 ○ ○ 
伽 ○ ○ 
賀 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
河 ○ 
舸 ○ 
柯 ○ 
軻 ○ 
香 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
髪 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
蚊 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
鹿 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
芳 ○ 
歟 ○ 
KAGU 
芳 ○ 
KAGO 
香 ○ ○ ○ 
KAKU 
各 ○ ○ 
覺 ○ ○ 
KAMU 
甘 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
含 ○ 
敢 ○ 
565 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
KANA 
閑 ○ 
KANI 
干 ○ ○ ○ 
漢 ○ 
KAPA 
甲 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
KAPI 
合 ○ 
KARA 
韓 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
KATU 
葛 ○ 
KAWA 
考 ○ 
KE 
居 ○ ○ 
既 ○ ○ 
希 ○ 
擧 ○ 
氣 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
戒 ○ 
開 ○ 
該 ○ 
慨 ○ 
概 ○ 
凱 ○ 
愷 ○ 
階 ○ 
毛 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
食 ○ ○ ○ 
飼 ○ 
消 ○ 
笥 ○ 
KI 
支 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
耆 ○ ○ ○ 
岐 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
吉 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
枳 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
棄 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
伎 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
企 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
祇 ○ 
566 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
祁 ○ 
來 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
寸 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
杵 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
KITI ○ 
吉 
KO 
己 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
許 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
既 ○ ○ 
去 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
巨 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
居 ○ ○ ○ 
虚 ○ ○ 
忌 ○ 
擧 ○ ○ 
莒 ○ 
據 ○ 
渠 ○ 
木 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
KOGO 
興 ○ ○ ○ 
極 ○ 
KOMU 
今 ○ ○ 
金 ○ 
感 ○ ○ 
紺 ○ 
KONO 
近 ○ ○ 
KOTI 
乞 ○ 
KU 
久 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
跪 ○ ○ 
垝 ○ 
苦 ○ ○ ○ 
句 ○ ○ ○ 
玖 ○ ○ ○ 
口 ○ 
群 ○ ○ ○ 
丘 ○ 
九 ○ 
鳩 ○ 
567 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
孔 ○ 
倶 ○ 
區 ○ ○ 
矩 ○ 
絇 ○ 
寠 ○ 
衢 ○ 
屨 ○ 
來 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
KUGU 
功 ○ 
KUKU 
菊 ○ ○ 
鞠 ○ 
KUNI 
君 ○ ○ 
訓 ○ ○ ○ 
KUTA 
忽 ○ ○ ○ 
KUTU 
骨 ○ ○ 
KWI 
鬼 ○ ○ ○ 
貴 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
歸 ○ ○ ○ 
紀 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
幾 ○ ○ 
奇 ○ ○ 
記 ○ 
寄 ○ 
綺 ○ 
騎 ○ 
機 ○ 
基 ○ 
己 ○ 
既 ○ 
氣 ○ 
木 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
城 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
黄 ○ ○ ○ 
樹 ○ ○ 
KWO 
古 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
觚 ○ 
568 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
高 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
固 ○ ○ 
故 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
庫 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
祜 ○ 
枯 ○ 
姑 ○ ○ 
孤 ○ ○ 
顧 ○ 
子 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
兒 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
小 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
籠 ○ ○ ○ 
粉 ○ 
KYE 
奚 ○ ○ ○ 
祁 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
家 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
計 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
鷄 ○ ○ ○ 
介 ○ ○ 
谿 ○ 
價 ○ 
賈 ○ 
結 ○ 
係 ○ 
稽 ○ 
啓 ○ 
異 ○ 
KYEMU 
兼 ○ 
監 ○ 
險 ○ 
MA 
馬 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
麻 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
末 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
昧 ○ ○ 
滿 ○ ○ ○ 
莫 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
明 ○ 
磨 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
萬 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
摩 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
569 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
麼 ○ ○ 
魔 ○ 
莽 ○ 
間 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
目 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
信 ○ 
鬼 ○ 
眞 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
喚犬 ○ 
MAGA 
望 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
MAKU ○ 
幕 
ME 
米 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
梅 ○ ○ 
迷 ○ 
昧 ○ 
毎 ○ 
妹 ○ 
目 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
眼 ○ ○ 
海藻 ○ 
MI 
彌 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
美 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
瀰 ○ 
民 ○ 
弭 ○ 
寐 ○ 
湄 ○ 
三 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
御 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
見 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
水 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
參 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
視 ○ 
MINU 
敏 ○ 
MO 
母 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
文 ○ ○ ○ 
梅 ○ 
茂 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
570 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
望 ○ 
暮 ○ 
慕 ○ 
莽 ○ 
謀 ○ 
墓 ○ 
悶 ○ 
聞 ○ ○ 
忘 ○ 
蒙 ○ 
門 ○ 
問 ○ 
勿 ○ 
畝 ○ 
物 ○ ○ ○ 
裳 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
藻 ○ 
喪 ○ ○ 
哭 ○ 
裙 ○ 
MOKU 
木 ○ ○ ○ 
MOTO 
没 ○ ○ ○ 
MU 
牟 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
武 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
模 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
無 ○ ○ 
務 ○ ○ 
霧 ○ 
夢 ○ 
謀 ○ 
鵡 ○ 
儛 ○ 
六 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
身 ○ 
牛鳴 ○ 
MUKU 
目 ○ 
MWI 
未 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
味 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
微 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
571 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
尾 ○ 
身 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
實 ○ ○ 
箕 ○ 
MWITU 
密 ○ ○ 
MWO 
模 ○ ○ ○ 
謨 ○ ○ 
毛 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
MYE 
賣 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
咩 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
馬 ○ ○ 
面 ○ 
迷 ○ 
謎 ○ 
綿 ○ 
明 
女 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
婦 ○ 
NA 
奴 ○ ○ 
那 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
難 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
乃 ○ ○ 
奈 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
儺 ○ 
娜 ○ 
寧 ○ 
名 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
魚 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
中 ○ 
菜 ○ 
七 ○ 
莫 ○ 
NAGI 
嚢 ○ 
NAKI 
諾 ○ 
NAME 
南 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
NAMI 
冉 ○ 
572 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
NE 
尼 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
禰 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
泥 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
埿 ○ 
年 ○ 
涅 ○ 
根 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
嶺 ○ 
NEMU 
念 ○ 
NI 
爾 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
貳 ○ ○ ○ 
仁 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
邇 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
尼 ○ ○ 
日 ○ ○ 
而 ○ 
耳 ○ 
珥 ○ 
儞 ○ 
丹 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
荷 ○ ○ 
煮 ○ ○ 
似 ○ 
土 ○ 
瓊 ○ ○ 
NIPU 
入 ○ 
NO 
乃 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
能 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
廼 ○ 
笶 ○ ○ 
荷 ○ ○ 
箆 ○ 
NU 
柔 ○ ○ 
蕤 ○ ○ 
奴 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
怒 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
努 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
弩 ○ ○ 
573 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
農 ○ ○ ○ 
濃 ○ ○ 
沼 ○ ○ ○ 
宿 ○ 
寐 ○ 
渟 ○ ○ 
NUNI 
潤 ○ 
NWO 
奴 ○ ○ ○ 
努 ○ ○ ○ 
怒 ○ ○ ○ 
弩 ○ ○ 
野 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
O 
意 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
於 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
淤 ○ ○ 
飫 ○ ○ 
憶 ○ ○ 
應 ○ 
隠 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
OMI 
音 ○ 
ONO 
磤 ○ 
OPA 
邑 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
OTO 
乙 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
PA 
巴 ○ ○ ○ 
伴 ○ ○ ○ 
半 ○ ○ ○ 
叵 ○ ○ 
波 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
播 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
幡 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
破 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
方 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
芳 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
八 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
判 ○ 
胖 ○ 
574 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
簸 ○ 
泮 ○ 
絆 ○ 
婆 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
房 ○ ○ 
薄 ○ 
泊 ○ 
盤 ○ 
皤 ○ ○ 
羽 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
齒 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
葉 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
者 ○ 
PAKA 
博 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
伯 ○ ○ 
PAPU 
法 ○ ○ 
PE 
閉 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
拜 ○ ○ ○ 
倍 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
陪 ○ ○ 
背 ○ 
杯 ○ 
俳 ○ 
沛 ○ 
珮 ○ 
戸 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
綜 ○ ○ 
經 ○ 
甕 ○ 
缻 ○ 
PI 
卑 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
比 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
必 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
賓 ○ 
臂 ○ 
避 ○ 
毘 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
譬 ○ 
嬪 ○ 
日 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
575 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
檜 ○ ○ ○ 
氷 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
PO 
富 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
費 ○ ○ 
番 ○ 
蕃 ○ 
方 ○ 
朋 ○ ○ 
倍 ○ 
陪 ○ 
裒 ○ 
袍 ○ 
火 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
焰 ○ 
帆 ○ ○ 
POMU 
品 ○ ○ ○ 
POPO 
法 ○ ○ ○ 
PU 
不 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
夫 ○ ○ ○ 
服 ○ ○ ○ 
布 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
甫 ○ ○ 
賦 ○ ○ 
福 ○ ○ 
否 ○ 
敷 ○ ○ 
府 ○ 
赴 ○ 
富 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
負 ○ 
符 ○ 
浮 ○ 
輔 ○ 
經 ○ ○ 
歴 ○ ○ 
乾 ○ 
PUGE 
鳳 ○ 
PUNI 
粉 ○ 
576 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
PUTI 
弗 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
PWI 
皮 ○ ○ ○ 
非 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
斐 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
肥 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
飛 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
悲 ○ ○ ○ 
彼 ○ 
祕 ○ 
妃 ○ 
被 ○ 
火 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
樋 ○ ○ 
乾 ○ 
干 ○ 
簸 ○ 
熯 ○ 
PWO 
菩 ○ ○ ○ 
本 ○ ○ ○ 
布 ○ 
保 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
寳 ○ ○ 
譜 ○ 
報 ○ 
褒 ○ 
防 ○ ○ ○ 
抱 ○ 
袍 ○ 
穂 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
百 ○ 
福 ○ ○ 
凡 ○ ○ 
PYE 
俾 ○ ○ ○ 
邊 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
反 ○ 
返 ○ 
遍 ○ 
辧 ○ 
平 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
覇 ○ ○ 
577 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
敝 ○ 
幣 ○ ○ 
蔽 ○ 
陛 ○ ○ 
鼙 ○ 
鞞 ○ 
重 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
隔 ○ 
PYEKI 
伯 ○ ○ ○ 
PYENI 
篇 ○ 
RA 
羅 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
邏 ○ ○ ○ 
良 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
浪 ○ 
郎 ○ 
廊 ○ 
莨 ○ 
囉 ○ 
攞 ○ 
𡤢 ○ 
𧟌 ○ 
RAKU 
樂 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
落 ○ 
RAMU 
覽 ○ 
藍 ○ 
濫 ○ 
RAPU 
臘 ○ 
RE 
例 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
禮 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
連 ○ ○ 
列 ○ 
烈 ○ 
戻 ○ 
黎 ○ 
REMU 
廉 ○ 
578 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
RI 
利 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
離 ○ ○ ○ 
理 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
里 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
隣 ○ 
唎 ○ 
梨 ○ 
釐 ○ 
RO 
慮 ○ 
里 ○ 
呂 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
侶 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
閭 ○ 
勒 ○ 
廬 ○ 
稜 ○ 
ROGI 
綾 ○ 
RU 
流 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
留 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
琉 ○ ○ ○ 
屢 ○ 
漏 ○ 
樓 ○ 
婁 ○ 
蘆 ○ 
盧 ○ 
類 ○ 
RWO 
路 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
盧 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
鹵 ○ ○ ○ 
魯 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
婁 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
漏 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
樓 ○ ○ 
露 ○ 
RWOKU 
六 ○ 
SA 
沙 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
579 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
佐 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
左 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
差 ○ ○ 
娑 ○ ○ 
柴 ○ ○ 
舎 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
作 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
者 ○ ○ 
紗 ○ 
草 ○ 
瑳 ○ ○ 
磋 
狹 ○ ○ ○ 
猿 ○ ○ 
羅 ○ 
SAGA 
相 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
SAGU 
倉 ○ 
SAKA 
積 ○ ○ ○ 
尺 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
釋 ○ 
SAKI 
跡 ○ ○ 
SAMA 
參 ○ ○ 
SAMU 
三 ○ 
SANI 
散 ○ 
SANO 
戔 ○ 
贊 ○ ○ 
讚 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
SAPA 
雜 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
SAPI 
匝 ○ ○ ○ 
SAPU 
颯 ○ 
SATI 
薩 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
刷 ○ 
580 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
SAWA 
早 ○ ○ 
草 ○ ○ 
SAYO 
最 ○ 
SE 
斯 ○ ○ 
齊 ○ ○ ○ 
西 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
洒 ○ ○ 
施 ○ ○ 
勢 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
世 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
制 ○ 
細 ○ 
栖 ○ 
是 ○ 
劑 ○ 
瀬 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
湍 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
背 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
脊 ○ 
迫 ○ 
石花 ○ 
SEMI 
瞻 ○ 
SI 
斯 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
資 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
次 ○ ○ ○ 
子 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
之 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
尸 ○ ○ ○ 
師 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
新 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
思 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
四 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
司 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
志 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
紫 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
芝 ○ ○ 
詩 ○ ○ 
旨 ○ ○ 
寺 ○ 
581 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
指 ○ ○ 
死 ○ 
此 ○ ○ 
時 ○ ○ 
偲 ○ 
信 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
詞 ○ 
嗣 ○ 
辭 ○ 
試 ○ 
璽 ○ 
始 ○ 
伺 ○ 
自 ○ 
施 ○ 
絁 ○ 
茲 ○ 
矢 ○ 
洎 ○ 
爲 ○ ○ 
磯 ○ ○ 
羊蹄 ○ ○ 
SIGU 
鍾 ○ 
鐘 ○ 
SIKA 
餝 ○ 
色 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
SIKI 
式 ○ ○ 
拭 ○ 
SIKU 
叔 ○ ○ 
SIPI 
襲 ○ 
SITI 
質 ○ ○ 
SITU 
漆 ○ ○ 
SO 
曾 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
思 ○ ○ 
所 ○ ○ ○ 
增 ○ ○ 
582 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
噌 ○ 
僧 ○ ○ 
則 ○ 
諸 ○ 
贈 ○ ○ 
層 ○ 
賊 ○ 
衣 ○ ○ ○ 
背 ○ 
苑 ○ 
襲 ○ 
SU 
須 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
周 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
州 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
酒 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
洲 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
酢 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
主 ○ ○ ○ 
寸 ○ ○ 
珠 ○ ○ ○ 
數 ○ 
種 ○ 
衆 ○ 
春 ○ 
秀 ○ 
殊 ○ 
輸 ○ 
素 ○ 
蒭 ○ 
巣 ○ ○ 
栖 ○ ○ 
簀 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
渚 ○ ○ 
爲 ○ 
SUKU 
足 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
宿 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
叔 ○ 
淑 ○ 
SURU 
駿 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
SWO 
蘇 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
583 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
巷 ○ ○ 
嗽 ○ 
宗 ○ ○ ○ 
素 ○ ○ 
祖 ○ ○ 
泝 ○ 
麻 ○ ○ 
十 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
追馬 ○ 
TA 
多 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
哆 ○ ○ 
大 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
太 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
侈 ○ 
他 ○ ○ 
託 ○ ○ 
黨 ○ 
陁 ○ 
柂 ○ 
駄 ○ 
田 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
手 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
TAGI 
當 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
宕 ○ 
TAKU 
宅 ○ ○ 
TAMA 
澹 ○ 
淡 ○ ○ 
倓 
TAMI 
覃 ○ 
潭 ○ 
TANI 
丹 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
旦 ○ 
但 ○ 
TANWO 
檀 ○ 
TAPU 
答 ○ ○ ○ 
塔 ○ ○ 
584 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
TARA 
帶 ○ 
TATA 
達 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
TE 
鞮 ○ 
弖 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
天 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
帝 ○ ○ ○ 
提 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
低 ○ 
底 ○ 
堤 ○ ○ 
諦 ○ 
題 ○ 
代 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
手 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
價 ○ 
直 ○ 
TEMU 
點 ○ 
TI 
智 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
知 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
至 ○ ○ ○ 
致 ○ ○ 
直 ○ ○ ○ 
恥 ○ 
陳 ○ 
笞 ○ 
池 ○ 
馳 ○ 
鎭 ○ 
㨖 ○ 
千 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
茅 ○ ○ ○ 
道 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
血 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
乳 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
TIKI 
勅 ○ 
TINU 
珍 ○ ○ ○ 
585 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
TITI 
秩 ○ ○ 
TO 
臺 ○ 
登 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
止 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
等 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
澄 ○ 
騰 ○ ○ 
台 ○ ○ 
苔 ○ 
鄧 ○ 
藤 ○ 
鳥 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
十 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
跡 ○ ○ 
常 ○ 
TOKO 
徳 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
得 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
TU 
對 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
豆 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
都 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
通 ○ ○ ○ 
追 ○ ○ 
丑 
川 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
菟 ○ 
頭 ○ ○ 
屠 ○ 
途 ○ 
徒 ○ 
突 ○ 
圖 ○ 
覩 ○ 
津 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
TUKU 
筑 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
築 ○ 
竹 ○ ○ 
竺 ○ ○ 
TUNU 
敦 ○ ○ 
586 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
TUTU 
綴 ○ ○ 
TWO 
都 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
刀 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
斗 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
土 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
度 ○ ○ 
渡 ○ 
覩 ○ ○ 
図 ○ 
妬 ○ 
徒 ○ 
杜 ○ 
屠 ○ 
塗 ○ 
戸 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
聡 ○ ○ 
利 ○ ○ ○ 
門 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
鋭 ○ 
砥 ○ ○ ○ 
速 ○ 
疾 ○ 
礪 ○ ○ 
U 
于 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
有 ○ ○ ○ 
宇 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
汚 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
羽 ○ ○ ○ 
烏 ○ 
紆 ○ 
兎 ○ 
鵜 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
菟 ○ ○ ○ 
卯 ○ ○ ○ 
得 ○ ○ 
鸕 ○ 
URU 
雲 ○ ○ ○ 
UTU 
欝 ○ ○ 
587 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
WA 
倭 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
獲 ○ ○ ○ 
委 ○ ○ 
和 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
涴 ○ 
王 ○ 
丸 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
輪 ○ ○ 
曲 ○ ○ 
WATA 
曰 ○ ○ 
WE 
穢 ○ ○ 
衞 ○ ○ 
惠 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
佪 ○ 
廻 ○ 
慧 ○ 
隈 ○ 
坐 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
畫 ○ 
座 ○ 
咲 ○ 
WI 
爲 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
位 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
韋 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
威 ○ ○ ○ 
謂 ○ ○ 
委 ○ 
偉 ○ 
萎 ○ 
井 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
猪 ○ ○ ○ 
居 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
藺 ○ 
員 ○ ○ 
WO 
呼 ○ ○ 
烏 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
塢 ○ ○ 
曰 ○ ○ ○ 
乎 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
588 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
雄 ○ 
袁 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
遠 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
怨 ○ 
爲 ○ 
弘 ○ 
雍 ○ 
越 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
嗚 ○ 
汙 ○ 
惋 ○ 
小 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
尾 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
少 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
麻 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
男 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
雄 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
緒 ○ ○ ○ 
綬 ○ 
峽 ○ 
𠮧 ○ 
YA 
邪 ○ 
益 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
移 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
耶 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
夜 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
也 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
楊 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
陽 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
揚 ○ 
野 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
椰 ○ 
揶 ○ 
瑘 ○ 
掖 ○ 
養 ○ ○ 
屋 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
八 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
矢 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
箭 ○ ○ ○ 
YAMU 
鹽 ○ 
589 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
YE 
延 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
移 ○ ○ 
叡 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
曳 ○ ○ ○ 
遥 ○ ○ 
要 ○ 
穎 ○ ○ 
兄 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
江 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
枝 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
吉 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
YEMU 
炎 ○ ○ 
YO 
與 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
餘 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
已 ○ ○ 
豫 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
預 ○ ○ ○ 
譽 ○ 
世 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
吉 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
四 ○ 
代 ○ 
呼 ○ 
齒 ○ 
YU 
由 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
喩 ○ ○ 
遊 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
油 ○ 
瑜 ○ 
踰 ○ 
愈 ○ 
臾 ○ 
庾 ○ 
弓 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
湯 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
YWO 
用 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
欲 ○ ○ 
容 ○ ○ 
庸 ○ 
590 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
𠰩 ○ 
夜 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
ZA 
射 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
邪 ○ ○ ○ 
奢 ○ 
蔵 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
社 ○ ○ ○ 
謝 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
座 ○ 
奘 ○ 
裝 ○ 
ZAMI 
蹔 ○ 
ZE 
是 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
筮 ○ 
噬 ○ 
ZI 
自 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
士 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
盡 ○ ○ 
慈 ○ ○ ○ ○ 
時 ○ ○ 
仕 ○ 
寺 ○ 
珥 ○ 
茸 ○ 
餌 ○ 
耳 ○ 
貳 ○ 
兒 ○ 
爾 ○ 
下 ○ 
ZIMI 
深 ○ 
甚 ○ ○ 
ZO 
敍 ○ ○ ○ ○ ○ 
存 ○ 
賊 ○ 
序 ○ ○ 
鋤 ○ 
591 
WS PBS NT SSI KJK MK NS SM SNG FK BSS MYS 
鐏 ○ 
茹 ○ 
ZU 
受 ○ ○ ○ ○○ ○ ○ 
授 ○ 
殊 ○ 
聚 ○ 
儒 ○ 
孺 ○ 
ZWO 
俗 ○ 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

 

 

 

Aoki Kazuo, Inaoka Kōji, Sasayama Haruo, and Shirafuji Noriyuki, eds. 1989. Shoku 
Nihongi. Shin Nihon Koten Bungaku Taikei. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten. 5 volumes. 

Baxter, William H., and Laurent Sagart. 2014. Old Chinese: A New Reconstruction. 
London: Oxford University Press. 

Beckwith, Christopher I. 2004. Koguryo: The Language of Japan’s Continental Relatives. 
Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers. 

Bentley, John R. 1997. “Mo and Po in Old Japanese.” Unpublished MA thesis, University 
of Hawai‘i, Mānoa. 

——–. 2000: “A New Look at Paekche and Korean: Data from Nihon shoki.” Language 
Research 36.2, pp. 417–443. 

——–. 2001. “The Origin of Man’yōgana.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and 
African Studies 64.1, pp. 59–73. 

——–. 2002. “The Spelling of /mo/ in Old Japanese.” Journal of East Asian Linguistics 
11.4, pp. 349–374. 

——–. 2006. The Authenticity of Sendai kuji hongi: A New Examination of Texts, with a 
Translation and Commentary. Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers. 

——–. 2008. “The Search for the Language of Yamatai.” Japanese Language and 
Literature 42, pp. 1–43. 

——–. 2012. “The Birth and Flowering of Japanese Historiography: From Chronicles to 
Tales to Historical Interpretation.” In volume 2 of Oxford History of Historical 
Writing. Oxford University Press. Pp. 58–79. 

Cenun okphyen (The Jeweled Manuscript of Complete Rhymes). 1868. Handwritten 
manuscript in possession of University of Hawai‘i’s Hamilton Library. The original 
work dates from 1796. 

Coblin, W. South. 1983. A Handbook of Eastern Han Sound Glosses. Hong Kong: 
Chinese University Press. 

——–. 1994. A Compendium of Phonetics in Northwest Chinese. No. 7 in Monograph 
Series of Journal of Chinese Linguistics. 

Downer, G. B. 1987. “Rhymes and Rhyming in Vietnamese.” In Wang Li Memorial 
Volumes: English Volume. Edited by the Chinese Language Society of Hong 
Kong. Hong Kong: Joint Publishing Co. 

Eom, Ik-sang. 1991. “A Comparative Phonology of Chinese and Sino-Paekche Korean.” 
PhD dissertation, Indiana University. 

Frellesvig, Bjarke, and John Whitman. 2004. “The Vowels of Proto-Japanese.” Japanese 
Language and Literature 38, pp. 281–299. 

Ienaga Saburō, Inoue Mitsusada, Ōno Susumu, and Sakamoto Tarō, eds. 1986. Nihon 
Shoki. Nihon Koten Bungaku Taikei. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten. 

Inukai Takashi. 2014. “Kodai Nikkan ni okeru gengo hyōki.” In Kodai Nihon to kodai 
Chōsen no moji bunka kōryū, edited by Hirakawa Minami, Tokyo: Taishūkan 
Shoten. Pp. 124–145. 

Jidai betsu kokugo daijiten: Jōdaihen. See Omodaka Hisataka 1967. 

Kamata Jun’ichi. 1980. Sendai kuji hongi. Volume 8 of Koten-hen, Shintō Taikei. Tokyo: 
Shintō Taikei Hensankai. 


Kamata Tadashi and Toratarō Yoneyama, 1987. Kangorin. Tokyo: Taishūkan. 

Kinoshita Reijin. 1964. “Nihon shoki sozairon e no hitotsu no kokoromi.” In volume 1 of 
Nihon Shoki Kenkyū, edited by Mishina Shōei and Yokota Kenichi, Tokyo: Hazama 
Shobō. Pp. 257–294. 

Kitagawa Hirokuni. 1991. Nihon jōdai kinsekibun jiten (Dictionary of Ancient Japanese 
Metal-Stone Inscriptions). Tokyo: Yūzankaku. 

Knechtges, David R., trans. 1982–2000. Wen xuan: Selections of Refined Literature. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 3 volumes. 

Kojima Noriyuki, Naoki Kōjirō, Nishimiya Kazutami, and Kuranaka Susumu, eds. 2002. 
Nihon shoki. Nihon Koten Bungaku Zenshū. Tokyo: Shōgakkan. 

Kuroita Katsumi. 1932. Nihongi shiki. Vol. 8 of Kokushi Taikei. Tokyo: Yoshikawa 
Kōbunkan. 

Lange, Roland A. 1973. The Phonology of Eighth-Century Japanese. Tokyo: Sophia 
University. 

Lurie, David Barnett. 2001. “The Origins of Writing in Early Japan: From the 1st to the 
8th Century CE.” Unpublished PhD dissertation, Columbia University. 

Mabuchi Kazuo. 1957. “Kojiki no ‘si’ ‘o’ ‘ho’ no kana.” Kokugogaku 31, pp. 61–90. 

——–. 1999. Kodai no sugata. Tokyo: Musashino Shoin. 

Martin, Samuel Elmo. 1987. The Japanese Language Through Time. New Haven: Yale 
University Press. 

Mathias, Gerald B. 1993. “Pre-Old Japanese Verb Morphology.” Paper presented at the 
American Oriental Society, April. 

Miller, Roy Andrew. 1967. The Japanese Language. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 

——–. 1975. The Footprints of the Buddha: An Eighth-Century Old Japanese Poetic 
Sequence. Volume 58 of the American Oriental Series. New Haven: American 
Oriental Society. 

——–. 1976. “Old Japanese sirö ‘fortress, citadel.’” In Walther Heissig, ed. Tractata 
Altaica: Denis Sinor, sexagenario optime de rebus altaicis merito dedicata. 
Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz. Pp. 397–415. 

——–. 1979. “Some Old Paekche Fragments.” Journal of Korean Studies 1, pp. 3–69. 

Miller, Roy Andrew, and Murayama Shichirō. 1979. “The Inariyama Tumulus Sword 
Inscription.” Journal of Japanese Studies 5.2, pp. 405–438. 

Mineya Tōru. 1972. Etsunan kanjion no kenkyū. Tokyo: Tōyō Bunko. 

Miyake, Marc Hideo. 1998. “Hyangchal: A Modern View of an Ancient Script.” In 
Byung-soo Park and James Hye Suk Yoon, eds. Selected Papers from the 11th 
International Conference on Korean Linguistics. Pp. 346–355. 

——–. 1999. “The Phonology of Eighth Century Japanese Revisited: Another 
Reconstruction Based on Written Records.” Unpublished PhD dissertation. 
University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa. 

——–. 2003a. Old Japanese: A Phonetic Reconstruction. London: Routledge Curzon. 

——–. 2003b. “Philological Evidence for *e and *o in Pre-Old Japanese.” Diachronica 
20.1, pp. 83–137. 

Mori Hiromichi. 1991. Kodai no on’in to Nihon shoki no seiritsu. Tokyo: Taishūkan Shoten. 

Morohashi Tetsuji. 1976. Dai kanwa jiten. 12 volumes. Tokyo: Taishūkan Shoten. 

Motoori Norinaga. 1976. Motoori Norinaga zenshū. Tokyo: Chikuma Shobō. 

Nakanishi Susumu. 1972. Man’yō no shi to shijin. Tokyo: Yayoi Shobō. 


Nguyễn, Quang Xỹ. 1971. Tự điển chữ Nôm (Character Dictionary of Chu Nom). Saigon: 
Bộ Giáo dục. 

Nihon shoki. See Ienaga Saburō et al. 1987. 

Numoto Katsuaki. 1997. Nihon kanjion no rekishiteki kenkyū. Tokyo: Kyūko Shoin. 

——–. 2006. “Nihongo no gogen to go’on, kan’on.” Contained in Yoshida Kanehiko, ed. 
Nihongo no gogen o manabu hito no tame ni. Kyoto: Sekai Shisōsha. Pp. 68–79. 

Ogura Hajime. 1995. Nihon go-on no kenkyū. Tokyo: Shintensha. 4 volumes. 

Omodaka Hisataka. 1967. Jidai betsu kokugo daijiten: Jōdaihen. Tokyo: Sanseido. 

——–. 1983. Man’yōshū chūshaku. Tokyo: Chūō Kōronsha. 

Ōno Tōru. 1962. Man’yōgana no kenkyū. Tokyo: Meiji Shoin. 

——–. 1977. Zoku man’yōgana no kenkyū. Tokyo: Takayama Honten. 

Onoda Mitsuo. 1977. Kojiki. Shintō Taikei. Tokyo: Shintō Taikei Hensankai. 

——–. 1986. Shaku Nihongi. Shintō Taikei. Tokyo: Shintō Taikei Hensankai. 

Phillipi, Donald. 1968. Kojiki. Tokyo: Tokyo University Press. 

Pulleyblank, E. G. 1970–1971. “Late Middle Chinese.” Asia Major 15, pp. 197–239; 16, 
pp. 121–168. 

——–. 1984. Middle Chinese: A Study in Historical Phonology. Vancouver: University 
of British Columbia Press. 

——–. 1991. Lexicon of Reconstructed Pronunciation in Early Middle Chinese, Late 
Middle Chinese, and Early Mandarin. Vancouver: University of British 
Columbia Press. 

Satake Akihiro, Yamada Hideo, Kudō Rikio, Ōtani Masao, and Yamazaki Yoshiyuki, eds. 
1999. Man’yōshū. Shin Nihon Koten Bungaku Taikei. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten. 5 
volumes. 

Schuessler, Axel. 2007. ABC Etymological Dictionary of Old Chinese. Honolulu: 
University of Hawai‘i Press. 

——–. 2009. Minimal Old Chinese and Later Han Chinese. Honolulu: University of 
Hawai‘i Press. 

Seeley, Christopher. 1991. A History of Writing in Japan. Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers. 

Sengaku. 1978. Man’yōshū chūshaku. In Man’yōshū kochūshaku taisei. Tokyo: 
Seishinsha. 

Starostin, Sergei. 2005. “Tower of Babel.” Internet resource: http://starling.rinet.ru. 

Takeuchi Rizō. 19777. Kan’en. Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kōbunkan. 

Tōdō Akiyasu. 1978. Kanwa daijiten. Tokyo: Gakushū Kenkyūsha. 

——–. 1980. Chūgokugo on’inron: Sono rekishiteki kenkyū. Tokyo: Kōseikan. 

Trương, Ðình Tín. 2007. Ðại từ điển chữ Nôm (The Great Character Dictionary of Chu 
Nom). Ho Chi Minh City: Nhà xuất bản Thuận Hóa. 

Vovin, Alexander. 1999. “Once Again on the Reading of the Old Korean 尸.” In The 
Emergence of the Modern Language Sciences: Studies on the Transition from 
Historical Comparative to Structural Linguistics in Honour of E.F.K. Koerner, 
vol. 2. Methodological Perspectives and Applications, edited by Sheila Embleton, 
John E. Joseph, and Hans-Josef Niederehe. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. Pp. 
289–300. 

——–. 2002. “An Old Korean Text in the ‘Manyoshu.’” In The Linguist’s Linguist: A 
Collection of Papers in Honour of Alexis Manaster Ramer, edited by Fabrice 
Cavoto, ed. Muenchen: Lincom Europa. Pp. 455–460. 

——–. 2012. Man’yōshū, Book 14. Leiden: Global Oriental. 


PINYIN INDEX 

 

 

Character page number 

 

Non-pinyin 

嗚呼 17 

蜂音 33 

可愛 59 

馬聲 91 

喚犬 187 

海藻 193 

牛鳴 217 

石花 386 

羊蹄 410 

追馬 436 

 

ā 

阿 13 

 

āi 

埃 58 

哀 58 

 

ái 

皚 67 

 

ài 

愛 18, 56 

㝵 67 

礙 66 

 

ān 

安 14 

菴 18 

 

àn 

闇 18 

 

bā 

八 279, 536 

巴 273 

 

băi 

百 325 

 

 

bàn 

半 274 

絆 281 

辧 328 

 

bāo 

褒 323 

 

băo 

寳 322 

保 321 

 

bào 

抱 324 

袍 303, 324 

報 323 

 

bēi 

杯 289 

卑 291 

悲 317 

 

bèi 

倍 22, 288, 301 

背 289, 386, 

 419 

備 33 

被 318 

 

bĕn 

本 321 

 

bí 

鼻 24 

 

bĭ 

俾 326 

妣 27 

比 292 

彼 317 

 

 

bì 

婢 25, 35 

避 295 

臂 295 

譬 296 

必 294 

敝 329 

幣 329 

蔽 330 

陛 331 

箆 257 

祕 317 

閉 286 

 

biān 

邊 326 

 

biàn 

遍 328 

辧 328 

 

bīng 

氷 298 

 

bĭng 

鞞 331 

 

bō 

波 275 

 

bó 

伯 285, 333 

泊 282 

博 285 

薄 22, 282 

 

bŏ 

簸 280, 320 

 

bò 

播 276 

 

bù 

不 305 

歩 32 

布 306, 321 

 

cāi 

偲 403 

 

cài 

菜 236 

 

cān 

參 199, 374 

 

cán 

戔 375 

 

cāng 

倉 373 

 

cáng 

蔵 560 

 

căo 

草 370, 379 

 

cēn 

參 199, 374 

 

céng 

曾 414 

層 418 

 

chā 

差 367 

 

cháng 

裳 208 

常 475 

 

cháo 

巣 429 


chĕ 

哆 439 

 

chéng 

城 160 

澄 471 

 

chī 

笞 462 

 

chí 

提 41, 452 

池 462 

馳 463 

遲 44 

 

chĭ 

尺 373 

侈 441 

哆 439 

移 87, 529, 538 

恥 461 

柂 443 

陁 38, 443 

齒 284, 550 

 

chì 

勅 465 

 

chóng 

重 332 

 

chŏu 

丑 480 

 

chú 

鋤 572 

蒭 429 

 

chŭ 

杵 130 

 

chuān 

川 480 

 

chuán 

傳 40 

chūn 

春 427 

 

cí 

詞 404 

慈 566 

辭 405 

 

cĭ 

此 402 

 

cì 

次 391 

 

cōng 

聡 492 

 

cóng 

賓 294 

 

cù 

酢 425 

 

cún 

存 571 

 

cùn 

寸 129, 426 

 

cuō 

磋 371 

 

cuŏ 

瑳 371 

 

dá 

答 447 

達 448 

 

dà 

大 37, 440 

 

dài 

代 41, 455, 549 

帶 448 

 

 

dān 

丹 250, 447 

 

dăn 

膽 90 

 

dàn 

旦 447 

但 447 

倓 446 

淡 446 

澹 446 

 

dāng 

當 445 

 

dăng 

黨 442 

 

dàng 

宕 445 

當 445 

 

dāo 

刀 487 

 

dào 

道 48, 464 

 

dé 

得 59, 476, 501 

德 475 

 

dēng 

登 467 

 

dĕng 

等 470 

 

dèng 

鄧 473 

dī 

氐 449 

低 41, 453 

砥 493 

弖 449 

堤 41, 454 

鞮 449 

 

dĭ 

氐 449 

弖 449 

底 454 

 

dì 

地 46 

帝 451 

諦 455 

帶 448 

弟 42 

 

diăn 

點 458 

 

diàn 

田 42, 444 

殿 40 

 

diāo 

刀 487 

 

dŏu 

斗 487 

 

dòu 

豆 52, 477 

逗 53 

 

dū 

都 478, 486 

 

dŭ 

竺 485 

覩 483, 490 

 

dù 

杜 491 

度 54, 489 

渡 54, 489 

妬 490 

 

duī 

追 480 


duì 

對 477 

 

dūn 

敦 485 

 

duō 

多 438 

 

duó 

度 54, 489 

 

ē 

婀 15 

 

é 

俄 64 

峨 63 

蛾 63 

鵝 64 

 

è 

惡 17 

餓 63 

 

ĕn 

眼 192 

 

ér 

而 248 

兒 168, 569 

 

ĕr 

耳 249, 568 

珥 249, 567 

餌 568 

爾 243, 569 

邇 246 

 

èr 

二 245 

貳 245, 569 

 

fá 

伐 20 

 

 

fă 

法 286, 305 

 

fà 

髪 107 

 

fān 

帆 304 

番 300 

幡 277 

蕃 300 

 

fán 

凡 325 

煩 27 

 

făn 

反 327 

返 327 

 

fāng 

方 279, 300 

芳 108, 279 

 

fáng 

防 323 

房 282 

 

fēi 

非 315 

飛 316 

妃 318 

 

féi 

肥 316 

 

fĕi 

斐 315 

 

fèi 

費 299 

 

fĕn 

粉 169, 314 

 

fèng 

鳳 313 

fŏu 

否 309 

缻 291 

 

fū 

夫 28, 306 

敷 309 

 

fú 

夫 28, 306 

扶 29 

福 308, 325 

服 306 

符 32, 311 

浮 312 

弗 314 

 

fŭ 

甫 308 

輔 312 

府 31, 310 

 

fù 

赴 310 

父 31 

賦 308 

傳 40 

負 311 

婦 228 

服 306 

富 298, 310 

 

gāi 

該 117 

 

gài 

概 118 

 

gān 

干 111, 319 

甘 110 

乾 319 

 

găn 

敢 110 

感 140 

 

gàn 

紺 140 

 

gāo 

高 163 

 

gē 

哥 99 

歌 99 

 

gé 

隔 332 

 

gĕ 

哿 100 

舸 105 

 

gè 

各 109 

箇 101 

葛 113 

 

gēn 

根 242 

 

gōng 

弓 554 

功 151 

 

gōu 

句 143 

勾 143 

區 148 

 

gū 

孤 166 

觚 163 

姑 166 

 

gŭ 

古 161 

賈 175 

骨 153 

 

 

 

 


gù 

故 164 

固 164 

顧 166 

 

guī 

歸 155 

 

guĭ 

垝 142 

鬼 153, 187 

 

guì 

跪 142 

檜 298 

貴 154 

 

hán 

含 110 

韓 113 

 

hàn 

熯 320 

漢 112 

 

hē 

訶 98 

 

hé 

和 504 

合 113 

何 62 

河 62, 105 

荷 251, 256 

 

hè 

荷 251, 256 

賀 62, 103 

 

hóng 

弘 522 

 

hòu 

候 81 

後 81 

 

 

hū 

乎 518 

呼 517, 549 

忽 152 

 

hú 

胡 80 

 

hŭ 

許 131 

 

hù 

戸 290, 492 

祜 165 

 

huà 

畫 511 

 

huáng 

黄 161 

 

huí 

佪 509 

廻 509 

 

huì 

穢 507 

惠 508 

慧 510 

 

huŏ 

火 303, 318 

 

huò 

畫 511 

獲 504 

 

jī 

劑 384 

基 158 

箕 221 

積 373 

鷄 173 

奇 61, 96, 156 

磯 410 

機 158 

 

稽 175 

跡 374, 474 

 

jí 

極 139 

脊 386 

吉 124, 543, 

 548 

疾 494 

 

jĭ 

己 130, 158 

枳 125 

幾 156 

 

jì 

既 114, 133, 

 158 

伎 126 

劑 384 

其 69 

紀 155 

記 157 

忌 136 

寄 157 

計 172 

洎 409 

 

jiā 

介 84, 99, 173 

加 93 

家 171 

嘉 102 

迦 95 

 

jiă 

甲 112 

榎 58 

 

jià 

架 102 

價 174, 457 

賈 175 

 

 

 

 

jiān 

監 177 

間 186 

兼 176 

 

jiàn 

監 177 

見 198 

箭 537 

 

jiāng 

江 542 

 

jiào 

𠮧 528 

 

jiē 

階 119 

 

jié 

結 175 

 

jiè 

介 84, 99, 173 

戒 117 

 

jīn 

今 139 

津 483 

金 139 

 

jìn 

近 140 

盡 566 

 

jīng 

經 291, 312 

 

jĭng 

井 515 

 

jiū 

鳩 147 

 

jiŭ 

九 146 

久 140 


玖 144 

酒 423 

 

jū 

居 94, 113, 134, 

 516 

倶 147 

 

jú 

菊 151 

鞠 151 

 

jŭ 

巨 134 

矩 148 

莒 137 

擧 115 

 

jù 

句 143 

勾 143 

巨 134 

具 73 

據 137 

寠 149 

屨 150 

聚 574 

 

jué 

覺 110 

 

jūn 

君 151 

 

jùn 

駿 432 

 

kāi 

開 117 

 

kăi 

凱 118 

愷 119 

 

kài 

慨 117 

 

kăo 

考 113 

 

kē 

柯 105 

珂 101 

軻 106 

 

kĕ 

可 96 

 

kŏng 

孔 147 

 

kŏu 

口 145 

 

kū 

枯 165 

哭 209 

 

kŭ 

苦 143 

 

kù 

庫 165 

 

là 

臘 341 

 

lái 

來 128, 150 

 

lài 

瀬 385 

 

lán 

藍 341 

 

lăn 

濫 341 

覽 340 

 

làn 

濫 341 

 

 

láng 

廊 338 

浪 337 

莨 338 

郎 337 

 

làng 

浪 337 

 

lè 

勒 353 

樂 339 

𡤢 339 

𧟌 339 

 

lèi 

類 359 

 

léng 

稜 354 

 

lí 

釐 350 

離 347 

梨 350 

黎 345 

 

lĭ 

里 348, 351 

理 347 

禮 342 

 

lì 

利 346, 492 

例 341 

戻 345, 357 

歴 313 

礪 494 

 

lián 

廉 345 

連 344 

 

liăn 

連 344 

 

 

liáng 

良 336 

 

liào 

樂 339 

 

liè 

戻 345, 357 

列 344 

烈 344 

 

lín 

隣 349 

 

lĭng 

嶺 242 

 

liú 

流 354 

琉 357 

留 356 

 

liù 

六 216, 363 

 

lóng 

籠 169 

 

lóu 

婁 358, 361 

樓 358, 363 

 

lòu 

漏 358, 362 

 

lú 

盧 359, 360 

廬 353 

鸕 501 

 

lŭ 

魯 361 

鹵 360 

 

 

 

 


lù 

路 48, 359 

露 363 

鹿 107 

 

lǘ 

婁 358, 361 

蘆 358 

閭 353 

 

lǚ 

呂 351 

侶 352 

屢 357 

 

lǜ 

慮 351 

 

luó 

羅 334, 372 

囉 338 

邏 335 

 

luŏ 

攞 338 

 

luò 

落 340 

 

má 

麻 178, 436, 

 526 

 

mă 

馬 178, 225 

 

mài 

賣 224 

 

măn 

滿 181 

 

măng 

莽 185, 204 

 

máo 

毛 119, 221 

矛 32 

茅 464 

 

măo 

卯 500 

mào 

茂 202 

 

méi 

梅 190, 201 

眉 34 

湄 197 

 

mĕi 

美 194 

毎 23, 191 

 

mèi 

眉 34 

媚 34 

妹 192 

昧 181, 191 

寐 26, 196, 262 

 

mén 

門 206, 493 

悶 205 

 

mèn 

悶 205 

 

méng 

蒙 206 

 

mèng 

夢 215 

 

mí 

迷 190, 226 

謎 35, 227 

彌 25, 193 

瀰 195 

縻 35 

 

mĭ 

米 188 

弭 26, 196 

彌 25, 193 

瀰 195 

 

mì 

祕 317 

密 221 

 

mián 

綿 227 

 

miàn 

面 226 

 

miē 

咩 225 

 

mín 

民 196 

 

mĭn 

敏 199 

 

míng 

名 234 

明 182, 227 

 

mó 

模 213, 221 

謨 221 

麼 21, 184 

摩 184 

磨 22, 182 

魔 21, 185 

 

mò 

莫 181, 236 

莽 185, 204 

末 180 

没 210 

 

móu 

謀 204, 215 

牟 210 

 

mòu 

茂 202 

 

mŭ 

母 200 

畝 207 

 

mù 

木 138, 159, 

 210 

莫 181, 236 

暮 203 

幕 188 

墓 205 

慕 203 

目 186, 192, 

 217 

 

nà 

那 229 

 

năi 

乃 231, 253 

迺 50, 256 

 

nài 

耐 44, 50 

奈 232 

 

nán 

男 526 

南 237 

難 231 

 

náng 

嚢 39, 236 

儴 39 

 

néng 

能 254 

 

ní 

尼 46, 238, 247 

泥 42, 47, 240 

埿 43, 241 

霓 85 

 

nĭ 

儞 249 

禰 238 


擬 78 

旎 47 

 

nì 

膩 47 

 

nián 

年 241 

 

niàn 

念 243 

 

niăo 

鳥 474 

 

niè 

涅 43, 241 

 

níng 

凝 72 

寧 234 

 

nóng 

農 260 

濃 261 

 

nú 

奴 54, 229, 258, 

 263 

 

nŭ 

努 260, 264 

弩 53, 260, 265 

砮 53 

 

nù 

怒 55, 259, 265 

 

nǚ 

女 227 

 

nuó 

那 229 

娜 39, 234 

儺 233 

 

 

nuò 

諾 237 

 

ōu 

區 148 

 

pái 

俳 289 

 

pán 

胖 280 

盤 283 

 

pàn 

伴 273 

判 280 

泮 281 

 

páng 

方 279, 300 

 

pàng 

胖 280 

 

páo 

袍 324 

 

péi 

陪 23, 288, 302 

 

pèi 

沛 289 

珮 290 

 

péng 

朋 301 

 

pī 

被 318 

 

pí 

皮 314 

鼙 331 

毘 24, 296 

 

pĭ 

否 309 

pì 

譬 296 

被 318 

 

piān 

篇 333 

 

pín 

嬪 297 

 

pĭn 

品 304 

 

píng 

平 328 

 

pó 

婆 19, 281 

皤 283 

 

pŏ 

叵 274 

 

pò 

迫 386 

覇 329 

破 278 

 

póu 

裒 302 

 

pŏu 

部 30, 36 

 

pú 

菩 320 

 

pŭ 

朴 59 

譜 323 

 

qī 

七 236 

谿 174 

漆 413 

 

 

qí 

其 69 

期 70 

碁 71 

枝 543 

岐 123 

祇 67, 128 

奇 61, 96, 156 

騎 157 

耆 122 

𡺸 69 

祁 128, 170 

齊 379 

 

qĭ 

乞 140 

企 127 

綺 157 

啓 176 

稽 175 

 

qì 

氣 115, 159 

棄 125 

 

qià 

姶 18 

 

qiān 

千 463 

 

qián 

戔 375 

 

qié 

伽 102 

 

qióng 

瓊 252 

 

qiū 

丘 146 

 

qiú 

求 75 

 

 


qū 

曲 507 

虚 135 

區 148 

 

qú 

渠 137 

絇 149 

衢 150 

 

qù 

去 133 

 

qún 

群 77, 146 

裙 209 

 

răn 

冉 237 

 

rén 

仁 246 

 

rĕn 

荏 58 

 

rì 

日 248, 297 

 

róng 

容 556 

茸 568 

 

róu 

柔 257 

 

rú 

茹 573 

儒 574 

孺 575 

 

rŭ 

乳 465 

 

rù 

入 252 

 

ruí 

蕤 257 

 

ruì 

叡 539 

鋭 493 

 

rùn 

潤 263 

 

să 

洒 380 

 

sà 

颯 377 

薩 378 

 

sān 

三 197, 374 

 

sàn 

散 375 

 

sāng 

喪 209 

 

sè 

色 411 

 

shā 

沙 364 

 

shăi 

洒 380 

 

shăo 

少 526 

 

shē 

奢 560 

 

shĕ 

舎 368 

 

 

 

 

shè 

射 90, 558 

舎 368 

社 561 

 

shēn 

深 570 

身 217, 220 

 

shèn 

甚 570 

 

shī 

尸 393 

詩 400 

施 381, 407 

絁 407 

師 394 

 

shí 

十 436, 474 

釋 374 

射 90, 558 

時 403, 566 

食 120 

實 221 

 

shĭ 

矢 408, 536 

笶 256 

始 406 

 

shì 

士 565 

仕 567 

式 412 

拭 412 

試 405 

餝 411 

是 384, 563 

施 381, 407 

世 382, 548 

筮 564 

噬 564 

勢 381 

視 199 

 

shŏu 

手 444, 456 

 

shòu 

受 573 

授 574 

綬 527 

 

shū 

輸 428 

妹 192 

殊 428, 574 

叔 413, 431 

淑 432 

 

shŭ 

數 426 

 

shù 

杼 49 

樹 161 

 

shuā 

刷 378 

 

shuĭ 

水 198 

 

sī 

司 396 

伺 406 

思 395, 415 

偲 403 

斯 379, 387 

 

sĭ 

死 402 

 

sì 

笥 121 

嗣 404 

飼 120 

似 252 

寺 401, 567 

四 396, 549 

 

 


sòu 

嗽 434 

 

sū 

蘇 432 

 

sú 

俗 575 

 

sù 

素 428, 435 

泝 436 

速 493 

 

suì 

穂 324 

 

suŏ 

所 416 

 

tā 

他 441 

 

tă 

塔 448 

 

tāi 

台 472 

苔 472 

 

tái 

臺 466 

 

tài 

太 37, 440 

 

tán 

倓 446 

談 40 

覃 446 

潭 446 

曇 54 

檀 447 

 

tè 

特 50 

 

téng 

縢 48 

騰 472 

 

tí 

題 455 

 

tiān 

天 451 

 

tián 

田 42, 444 

 

téng 

藤 49, 473 

 

tíng 

渟 263 

 

tōng 

樋 319 

通 480 

 

tóu 

頭 51, 481 

 

tū 

突 483 

 

tú 

兎 499 

菟 481, 500 

途 482 

塗 492 

屠 482, 491 

徒 482, 491 

圖 53, 483, 490 

 

tŭ 

土 54, 252, 489 

 

tuān 

湍 385 

 

tuō 

他 441 

託 442 

tuó 

柂 443 

陁 38, 443 

駄 444 

騨 38, 40 

 

wán 

丸 506 

 

wăn 

涴 505 

惋 524 

 

wàn 

萬 183 

 

wáng 

王 506 

 

wàng 

望 188 

忘 206 

 

wēi 

委 504, 514 

倭 503 

萎 515 

威 513 

微 219 

 

wéi 

爲 410, 430, 

 511, 522 

韋 513 

 

wĕi 

委 504, 514 

尾 220, 525 

偉 514 

 

wèi 

位 512 

未 218 

味 218 

謂 513 

衛 507 

 

wén 

文 201 

蚊 107 

聞 205 

 

wèn 

問 207 

聞 205 

 

wèng 

甕 291 

 

wŏ 

我 60 

 

wū 

於 268 

烏 498, 517 

鳴 523 

汙 524 

汚 497 

屋 535 

 

wú 

吾 16, 74, 79 

呉 82 

無 214 

 

wŭ 

五 90 

儛 216 

武 212 

鵡 216 

 

wù 

惡 17 

悟 83 

誤 82 

務 214 

鶩 32 

霧 215 

勿 207 

物 208 

 

xī 

奚 170 

希 114 


西 380 

栖 384, 429 

 

xí 

襲 413, 420 

 

xĭ 

洒 380 

璽 406 

 

xì 

係 175 

細 383 

 

xía 

峽 528 

狹 371 

 

xià 

下 83, 569 

夏 85 

 

xián 

閑 112 

 

xiăn 

險 177 

 

xiāng 

相 372 

香 106, 109 

 

xiàng 

巷 433 

 

xiāo 

消 121 

 

xiăo 

小 168, 525 

 

xiào 

咲 511 

 

xié 

邪 529, 559 

耶 530 

xiè 

謝 561 

 

xīn 

新 395 

 

xìn 

信 187, 404 

 

xīng 

興 138 

 

xiōng 

兄 541 

 

xióng 

雄 519, 527 

 

xiù 

秀 427 

宿 262, 431 

 

xū 

須 420 

 

xŭ 

許 131 

 

xù 

序 571 

敍 570 

緒 527 

 

xuè 

血 465 

 

xùn 

訓 152 

 

yā 

鴨 18 

 

yá 

牙 83 

 

yă 

雅 84 

yà 

亞 57 

 

yán 

炎 543 

鹽 537 

延 538 

 

yăn 

奄 18 

 

yàn 

焰 304 

 

yāng 

鞅 15 

 

yáng 

揚 533 

楊 533 

陽 533 

 

yăng 

養 535 

 

yāo 

要 541 

 

yáo 

遥 540 

 

yé 

邪 529, 559 

耶 530 

揶 534 

椰 534 

瑘 534 

 

yĕ 

也 532 

野 266, 534 

 

yè 

夜 531, 557 

掖 535 

葉 284 

 

yī 

壹 92 

伊 86 

衣 56, 419 

依 57 

揖 92 

 

yí 

怡 89 

疑 77 

儀 69 

宜 61, 65, 78 

夷 87 

 

yĭ 

乙 272 

已 88, 546 

以 89 

蟻 69 

 

yì 

意 267 

憶 270 

異 88, 176 

益 529 

邑 272 

易 89 

義 64, 78 

曳 539 

藝 68 

 

yīn 

音 271 

因 91 

 

yĭn 

磤 271 

隠 271 

 

yìn 

印 91 

 

yīng 

英 17 

應 271 

 

 


yĭng 

穎 541 

 

yōng 

雍 522 

庸 557 

 

yòng 

用 555 

𠰩 557 

 

yóu 

遊 552 

由 550 

油 552 

 

yŏu 

有 495 

 

yū 

紆 498 

淤 269 

 

yú 

于 495 

魚 235 

娯 76 

虞 75, 82 

餘 545 

歟 108 

譽 548 

臾 553 

瑜 552 

踰 553 

隅 76, 510 

愚 76 

 

yŭ 

羽 283, 498 

宇 496 

語 72 

與 543 

庾 553 

 

yù 

於 268 

御 73, 197 

馭 73 

預 547 

豫 547 

譽 548 

喩 551 

愈 553 

遇 74 

欲 556 

飫 270 

欝 502 

 

yuán 

袁 520 

猿 372 

 

yuăn 

遠 520 

 

yuàn 

怨 521 

苑 420 

 

yuē 

曰 507, 518 

 

yuè 

樂 339 

越 523 

 

yún 

雲 501 

員 516 

 

zā 

匝 377 

 

zá 

雜 376 

 

zàn 

贊 376 

讚 376 

 

zāng 

蔵 560 

 

 

zăo 

早 378 

藻 208 

 

zé 

則 417 

簀 429 

 

zéi 

賊 419, 571 

 

zēng 

曾 414 

僧 417 

增 416 

層 418 

 

zèng 

贈 418 

 

zhāi 

齊 379 

 

zhài 

宅 445 

 

zhān 

瞻 387 

 

zhàn 

蹔 563 

 

zhăo 

沼 262 

 

zhĕ 

者 285, 369 

 

zhēn 

眞 187 

珍 466 

 

zhèn 

鎭 463 

 

zhī 

之 392 

芝 399 

知 459 

枳 125 

支 121 

 

zhí 

直 457, 461 

 

zhĭ 

止 469 

旨 400 

指 401 

 

zhì 

志 397 

智 458 

直 457, 461 

制 383 

治 45 

至 460 

致 461 

㨖 463 

秩 466 

質 413 

 

zhōng 

中 235 

鍾 411 

鐘 411 

 

zhŏng 

種 427 

 

zhòng 

衆 427 

 

zhōu 

周 422 

州 423 

洲 424 

 

zhū 

珠 426 

猪 515 

諸 418 

 

 


zhú 

竹 485 

筑 484 

築 485 

 

zhŭ 

斗 487 

主 426 

渚 430 

煮 251 

 

zhù 

杼 49 

 

zhuàn 

傳 40 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

zhuāng 

奘 562 

裝 562 

 

zhuì 

綴 485 

 

zī 

茲 408 

資 390 

 

zĭ 

子 167, 392 

紫 398 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

zì 

柴 368 

自 407, 564 

 

zōng 

宗 434 

綜 290 

 

zú 

足 16, 430 

 

zŭ 

祖 435 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

zuì 

最 379 

 

zūn 

鐏 572 

 

zuŏ 

左 366 

佐 365 

 

zuò 

作 369 

坐 510 

座 511, 562 


